





IA-64 Assembly Language Reference Guide

January 2000


















Order Number 245363-001
































THIS DOCUMENT IS PROVIDED "AS IS" WITH NO WARRANTIES WHATSOEVER, INCLUDING ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, NONINFRINGEMENT, FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR ANY WARRANTY OTHERWISE ARISING OUT OF ANY PROPOSAL, SPECIFICATION OR SAMPLE.
Information in this document is provided in connection with Intel products. No license, express or implied, by estoppel or otherwise, to any intellectual property rights is granted by this document. Except as provided in Intel's Terms and Conditions of Sale for such products, Intel assumes no liability whatsoever, and Intel disclaims any express or implied warranty, relating to sale and/or use of Intel products including liability or warranties relating to fitness for a particular purpose, merchantability, or infringement of any patent, copyright or other intellectual property right. Intel products are not intended for use in medical, life saving, or life sustaining applications.
Intel may make changes to specifications and product descriptions at any time, without notice.
Designers must not rely on the absence or characteristics of any features or instructions marked "reserved" or "undefined." Intel reserves these for future definition and shall have no responsibility whatsoever for conflicts or incompatibilities arising from future changes to them.
Intel processors associated with the Assembly Language may contain design defects or errors known as errata which may cause the product to deviate from published specifications. Current characterized errata are available on request.
Copies of documents which have an order number and are referenced in this document, or other Intel literature, may be obtained by calling 1-800-548-4725, or by visiting Intel's website at http://developer.intel.com/design/litcentr.
Copyright (c) Intel Corporation, 2000
*Third-party brands and names are the property of their respective owners.









Contents

Chapter 1	Overview

About this Manual	1-1
Related Documentation	1-2
Notation Conventions	1-2
Chapter 2	Program Elements Overview
Identifiers	2-1
Name Spaces	2-2
Symbols	2-2
Symbol Names	2-3
Symbol Types	2-5
Symbol Values	2-6
Register Names	2-6
Mnemonics	2-7
Machine Instruction Mnemonics	2-8
Pseudo-op Mnemonics	2-8
Directive Mnemonics	2-9
Data Allocation Mnemonics	2-9
Constants	2-9
Numeric Constants	2-9
C Numeric Constants	2-10
MASM Numeric Constants	2-11
Characters in Numeric Constants	2-13
String Constants	2-14
Expressions	2-14
Absolute Expressions	2-14
Relocatable Expressions	2-14
Operators	2-15
Statements	2-16
Label Statements	2-16
Instruction Statements	2-17
Directive Statements	2-19
Assignment Statements	2-19
Symbol Assignment Statements	2-20
Register Assignment Statements	2-20
Equate Statements	2-21
Symbol Equate Statements	2-21
Register Equate Statements	2-21
Data Allocation Statements	2-22
Cross-section Data Allocation Statements	2-23
Chapter 3	Program Structure
Sections	3-1
Section Flags and Section Type Operands	3-2
Windows NT (COFF32) Specific Section Flag Operands . 3-3 Associated Section Name Flag	3-3
Section Definition Directive	3-4
Section Stack Directives	3-5
Absolute Sections	3-6
Section Return Directive	3-6
Predefined Section Directives	3-6
Using Section Directives	3-8
Include File Directive	3-8
Bundles	3-9
Implicit Bundling	3-10
Explicit Bundling	3-10
Auto-template Selection	3-10
Explicit-template Selection	3-11
Instruction Groups	3-12
Dependency Violations and Assembly Modes	3-13
Procedures	3-13
Procedure Directives	3-14
Procedure Label (PLabel)	3-14
Stack Unwind Directives	3-15
Syntax for the .save.x Directives	3-21
Stack Unwind Directives Usage Guidelines	3-22
Windows NT (COFF32) Symbolic Debug Directives	3-24
Chapter 4	Declarations
Symbol Scope Declaration	4-1
Local Scope Declaration Directive	4-2
Global Scope Declaration Directive	4-2
Weak Scope Declaration Directive	4-2
Weak Scope Declaration for UNIX (ELF)	4-3
Weak Scope Declaration for Windows NT (COFF32)	4-3
Symbol Type Directive	4-4
Symbol Size Directive	4-5
File Name Override Directive	4-6
Common Symbol Declarations	4-6
Common Symbol Directive	4-6
Local Common Symbol Directive	4-7
Alias Declaration Directives	4-8
Chapter 5	Data Allocation
Data Allocation Statements	5-1
Uninitialized Space Allocation	5-3
Alignment	5-4
Cross-section Data Allocation Statements	5-5
Chapter 6	Miscellaneous Directives
Register Stack Directive	6-1
Stacked Registers in Assignment and Equate
Statements	6-3
Rotating Register Directives	6-3
Using Rotating Register directives	6-5
Rotating Registers in Assignment and Equate
Statements	6-6
Byte Order Specification Directives	6-7
String Specification Directive	6-7
Radix Indicator Directive	6-8
Preprocessor Support	6-8
Chapter 7	Annotations
Predicate Relationship Annotation	7-1
Predicate Vector Annotation	7-2
Memory Offset Annotation	7-2
Entry Annotation	7-3

Appendix A Register Names by Type Appendix B Pseudo-ops
Appendix C Link-relocation Operators
Appendix D List of IA-64 Assembly Language Directives Glossary
Index




Overview	 1 
This manual describes the programming conventions used to write an assembly program for the IA-64 architecture.
As prerequisites, you should be familiar with the IA-64 architecture, and have assembly-language programming experience.

About this Manual
This manual contains the following chapters and appendixes:
• This chapter lists related documentation and notation conventions.
•   Chapter 2, "Program Elements Overview", describes the basic elements and language specifications of an assembly-language program for the IA-64 architecture.
• 	 Chapter 3, "Program Structure", describes the directives used to structure the program.
• 	 Chapter 4, "Declarations", describes the directives used to declare symbols in the program.
• 	 Chapter 5, "Data Allocation", describes the statements used to allocate initialized and unitialized space for data objects, and align data objects in the program.
• 	 Chapter 6, "Miscellaneous Directives", describes directives not used to structure a program or to declare symbols.
• 	 Chapter 7, "Annotations", describes the assembler annotations.


• Appendix A, "Register Names by Type", lists the IA-64 architecture registers.
• Appendix B, "Pseudo-ops", lists the IA-64 architecture psuedo operations and their equivalent machine instructions, and pseudo-ops with missing operands.
• Appendix C, "Link-relocation Operators", lists the link-relocation operators and describes their functionality.
• Appendix D,"List of IA-64 Assembly Language Directives", lists the assembly-language directives according to category.

Related Documentation
The following documents, available at http://developer.intel.com , provide additional information:
• IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual Volume 1: IA-64 Processor Application Architecture, order number 245317-001
Volume 2: IA-64 Processor System Architecture,
order number 245318-001
Volume 3: IA-64 Instruction Set Description,
order number 245319-001
Volume 4: IA-32 Instruction Set Description,
order number 245320-001
• IA-64 Software Conventions and Runtime Architecture Guide,
order number 245256-002

Notation Conventions
This notation is used in syntax descriptions:
This type style	Indicates an element of syntax, a reserved
word, keyword, a filename, computer output, or part of a program example. The text appears in lowercase, unless uppercase is significant.



This type style	Indicates the text you enter as input.
This type style	Indicates a placeholder for an identifier,
an expression, a string, a symbol or a value. Substitute one of these items for the placeholder.
[items]	Indicates optional items.
[items | item]	Indicates the possible choices. A vertical
bar (|) separates the items. Choose one of the items enclosed in brackets.








Program Elements Overview

This chapter describes the basic elements and language specifications of an assembly-language program for the IA-64 architecture. The basic program elements are identifiers, symbols, name spaces, constants, expressions, and statements.

Identifiers
In IA-64 assembly language, objects such as machine instructions, registers, memory locations, sections in the object file, and constants, have symbolic names. In the source code these names are represented syntactically by identifiers.
An identifier may contain letters, digits, and a few special characters. Identifiers may not begin with a digit.
Table 2-1 summarizes the rules for character usage in identifiers.

Table 2-1	Character Usage in Identifiers
Character TypesFirst CharactersRemaining CharactersLetters
Special charactersa-z or A-Z
@ _ $ ? .a-z or A-Z
@ _ $ ? .Digitsnot allowed0-9
The assembler may place a limit on the length of an identifier, but this limit must be no less than 256 characters.


Name Spaces
There are three classes of names in the IA-64 assembly language:
• Symbols, which refer to memory locations, sections, and symbolic constants. These names are case sensitive.
• Registers, which refer to registers defined in the IA-64 architecture. These names are not case sensitive. Some register names consist of multiple syntactic elements rather than a single identifier.
• Mnemonics, which refer to machine instructions, pseudo-ops, directives, and completers. These names are not case sensitive.
The assembler places names in three separate name spaces, according to their class. A name may not be defined twice in the same namespace, but it may be defined once in each namespace. When a name is defined in both the register and symbol namespaces, the register name takes precedence over the symbol unless the identifier is "protected" by terminating it with the # operator; this forces the assembler to look up the identifier in the symbol namespace.
The # operator in conjunction with a symbol is legal only when the symbol is an operand.
The following examples illustrate the correct use of the # operator: r5: //label named r5, where label is the symbol name movl r4=r5#//moves the r5 label address to register r4
.global r5#//declares label r5 as global
The # operator is unnecessary and illegal when included in the symbol definition, as shown:
r5#:	//illegal

Symbols
A symbol refers to a location in memory, an object file section, a numeric constant, or a register. A symbol has the following attributes:
• name


• type
• value
The special symbols dollar sign ($) and period (.) when used in expressions, always refer to the current location counter. The current location counter points to the address of a bundle containing the current instruction, or to the address of the first data object defined by the current assembly statement. There is no difference between these symbols, either can be used.
In the following example, the movl instruction moves the address of the bundle containing the current instruction ($) into register r1:
movl	r1=$
In the following data allocation statement, the period (.) is the address of the first data object defined by the assembly statement:
data4	2, 3, .

Symbol Names
Symbol names are case-sensitive identifiers. Symbols whose names begin with a period (.) are temporary. Temporary symbols are not placed in the object file symbol table. Symbols whose names begin with two periods (..) are temporary, and local. Local symbols are scope restricted symbols. Local symbols are recognized only within the scope in which they are defined. See the "Symbol Scope Declaration" section in Chapter 4 for more information about local symbol scopes.
Table 2-2 summarizes the rules for using temporary and scope-restricted indicators in different types of symbol names.

Table 2-2	Temporary and Scope-restricted Indicators in Symbol Names

Symbol Type
Temporary (.)Temporary and Scope Restricted (..)LabelsAllowedAllowedInstruction tagsAllowedAllowedFunction namesNot allowedNot allowed

Table 2-2	Temporary and Scope-restricted Indicators in Symbol Names
Temporary and Scope
Symbol Type	Temporary (.)	Restricted (..)
Symbolic constants	Not allowed	Allowed

Section names	Allowed	Not allowed

Symbols whose names begin with an "at" sign (@) are reserved as predefined constants. The assembler provides predefined symbolic constants for special operand values for several instructions, for example, fclass and mux instructions. Table 2-3 and Table 2-4 list the predefined symbolic constant names for the operands of these instructions. These symbolic constants can be used in expressions as any user-defined symbolic constant.

Table 2-3fclass Condition Predefined Operand NamesCategoryfclass ConditionsPredefined NameNaT testNaT@natSign testPositive
Negative@pos
@negClass testNormalized Unnormalized Signaling NaN Quiet NaN Zero
Infinity@norm @unorm @snan @qnan @zero
@infTable 2-4mux Bytes Operation Predefined Type OperandNamesmux Bytes Operation Type (mbtype )	Predefined Name
Reverse	@rev
Mix	@mix
Shuffle	@shuf
Alternate	@alt
Broadcast	@brcst


Symbol Types
A symbol's type indicates the class of object to which it refers. A symbol type can be any of the following:
label	Refers to a location of code or data in memory. A label cannot refer to a procedure entry point. A code label refers to the address of a bundle. An instruction that follows a code label always starts a new bundle. The "Bundles" section in Chapter 3 provides more information about instruction bundling.
instruction tag
A symbol that refers to an instruction. An instruction tag is used in branch prediction instructions, and in unwind information directives. Unlike a label, an instruction tag does not cause the instruction to start a new bundle.
function name A symbol that refers to a procedure entry point.
section name Represents an existing section that is active in the output object file.
symbolic constant
A constant assigned or equated to a number, symbol, or expression.


Symbol Values
A symbol is defined when it is assigned a value. A symbol value can also be a number or expression assigned to a symbolic constant. The value of a symbol identifies the object to which it refers. If the symbol refers to a location in memory, the assigned value is the address of that memory location. In most cases, this address is resolved only in link time.

Register Names
All registers have predefined names, which are listed in Appendix A. Predefined register names are not case-sensitive. You can assign new register names to some of the predefined registers with a register assignment statement, or a rotating register directive. See the "Assignment Statements", and "Equate Statements" section in this chapter, and the "Rotating Register Directives" section in Chapter 6, for more details. Registers that use the value of a specified general-purpose register as an index into the register file consist of the register file name followed by the name of a general register enclosed in brackets, such as pmc[r].
The assembler determines the register type according to the form of its name, as shown in Table 2-5. Some registers appear in name and number form. For example, ar.bsp is the name form of an application register, which also has a number form, ar17.




Table 2-5	Register Number and Name Forms
Register Form
Register Name
Register TypeNumber formr0 - r127General-purpose 64-bit registersin0 - in95loc0 - loc95out0 - out95f0 - f127Floating-point registersp0 - p63Predicate registers (1-bit)b0 - b7Branch registersar0 - ar127Application registerscr0 - cr127Control registersName forme.g. ar.bspNamed application registerse.g. cr.dcrNamed control registersprAll-predicate register (64-bits)pr.rotAll rotating registersipInstruction pointerpsr.lProcessor-status registerspsr.umIndirect file registerse.g. pmc[r2]Register file with general-purpose register as index.User-defined registersuser-nameRegisters assigned new names with assignment statements or rotating register directives.
Mnemonics
Mnemonics are predefined assembly-language names for machine instructions, pseudo-ops, directives, and data allocation statements. Mnemonics are not case-sensitive.


Machine Instruction Mnemonics
Machine instruction mnemonics specify the operation to be performed. For example, brp is the mnemonic for the branch predict instruction.
Some instruction mnemonics include suffixes and optional completers that indicate variations on the basic operation. The suffixes and completers are separated from the basic mnemonic by a period (.). For example, the instructions brp.pp (predicate predict), and brp.ret (return) include suffixes, and are variations of the basic branch predict (brp) instruction.
In this manual, completers are italicized to distinguish them from the instruction mnemonic suffixes. For example, in the instruction brp.ret.sptk.imp b0,L, the optional completers appear in italics to set them apart from the .ret suffix.
For a full description of the instructions, see the IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual.

Pseudo-op Mnemonics
Pseudo-op mnemonics represent assembler instructions that alias machine instructions. They are equivalent to instruction mnemonics and are provided for the convenience of the programmer. See Appendix B for a list of the assembler pseudo-ops.
The following is an example of a pseudo-op:
mov r5=2
The assembler translates this pseudo-op into the equivalent machine instruction:
add1 r5=2,r0
For more details about the pseudo-ops, see the IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual.


Directive Mnemonics
Directives are assembler instructions to the assembler during the assembly process; they do not produce executable code. To distinguish them from other instructions, directive mnemonics begin with a period (.).
Chapter 3 through Chapter 7 describe the assembler directives and explain how to use them.

Data Allocation Mnemonics
Data allocation mnenonics specify the types of data objects assembled in data allocation statements. See the "Data Allocation" section in Chapter 5 for a list of these mnemonics. Data allocation statements are used to allocate initialized memory areas.

Constants
Constants can be numeric or string.
• Numeric constants contain integers and floating-point numbers.
• String constants contain one or more characters.

Numeric Constants
A numeric constant contains integer and floating-point numbers. The assembler supports C and Microsoft Macro Assembly language (MASM) numeric constants. C numeric constants are the default.


C Numeric Constants
C numeric constants can be any of the following:
• Decimal integer constants (base 10) consist of one or more digits, 0
through 9, where 0 cannot be used as the first digit.
• Binary constants (base 2) begin with a 0b or 0B prefix, followed by one or more binary digits (0, 1).
• Octal constants (base 8) consist of one or more digits 0 through 7, where the first digit is 0.
• Hexadecimal constants (base 16) begin with a 0x or 0X prefix, followed by a hexadecimal number represented by a combination of digits 0 through 9, and characters A through F.
• Floating-point constants consist of:
- an optional sign	- or +
- an integer part	a combination of digits 0 through 9
- a period	.
- a fractional part	a sequence of digits 0 through 9
- an optional exponent	e or E, followed by an optionally signed sequence of one or more digits
For example, the following floating-point constant contains both the optional and required parts: +1.15e-12.
The following floating-point constant contains only the required parts: 1.0
The following formal grammar summarizes the rules for the C numeric constants:
C-constant:
C-integer-constant floating-point-constant character-constant

C-integer-constant:


[1-9][0-9]* 0[bB][01]*
0[0-7]*
0[xX][0-9a-fA-F]*


floating-point-constant:
integer-part.[ fractional-part ] [ exponent-part ]

integer-part:
[0-9]*


fractional-part:
[0-9]*


exponent-part: [eE][+-][0-9]* [eE][0-9]*
MASM Numeric Constants
MASM numeric constants can be any of following:
• Radix constants are numeric constants that also specify the radix of the value. They consist of one or more digits, 0 through 9, followed by a radix indicator. The radix indicators of MASM numeric constants define them as decimal (D), hexadecimal (H), octal (O), or binary (B). If the current radix is hexadecimal, the letters B and D are interpreted as digits. In this case, T specifies a decimal radix, and Y specifies a binary radix. See Table 2-6.
Radix indicators are not case-sensitive.
See the "Radix Indicator Directive" section in Chapter 6, for more information about how to specify a radix.


• Integer constants in the current radix consist of one or more digits, 0 through 9, A through F. If the current radix is not hexadecimal, the characters A through F are not applicable.
• Floating-point constants have the same syntax as in C. See the "C Numeric Constants" section on page 2-10.
Table 2-6	MASM Radix Indicators
Radix	Radix Indicator Suffix

Decimal	D (d), or T (t) when the current radix is hex
Hexadecimal	H (h)
Octal	O (o) or Q (q)
Binary	B (b), or Y (y) when the current radix is hex

The following formal grammar summarizes the rules for the MASM numeric constants:
MASM-constant:
MASM-integer-constant MASM-radix-constant floating-point-constant character-constant

MASM-integer-constant:
[0-9][0-9a-fA-F]*
MASM-radix-constant
[0-9][0-9a-fA-F]*[tTdDhHOoqQbByY]


floating-point-constant: (as in C, see page 2-11.)


Characters in Numeric Constants
An underscore (_) can be inserted in a numeric constant to improve readability, as follows 1_000_000. An underscore can be inserted anywhere except before the first character. The assembler ignores underscores.
Characters can represent numeric constants. For instance, a single ASCII character can represent a numeric constant by enclosing it in single quotes (''). The numeric constant is the ASCII value of the specified characterise use other special characters to represent numeric constants, use the character escapes defined in the ANSI C language, and enclose them in single quotes. Table 2-7 lists the common character escapes. To use the single quote ( ' ) to represent a numeric constant, insert a backslash (\) before it, and enclose both in single quotes (''), as such,'\''.

.Table 2-7Common Character EscapesEscapeCharacter	DefinitionASCII Value\'	Single quote39\"	Double quote34\b	Backspace8\t	Tab9\n	New line10\f	Form feed12\r	Carriage return13\\	Backslash92\num	Character with octal value num
(maximum three digits)-\Xhh	Character with the hexadecimal value
hh (maximum two digits)-

String Constants
String constants consist of a sequence of characters enclosed in double quotes ("").
To specify double-quotes (") in a string constant, insert a backslash (\) before it, as such, "\"".
To include other special characters in a string constant, use the character escapes defined in the ANSI C language. See Table 2-7 for a list of common character escapes.

Expressions
An expression is a combination of symbols, numeric constants, and operators that uses standard arithmetic notation to yield a result.
Expressions can be absolute or relocatable.

Absolute Expressions
An expression is absolute when it is not subject to link-time relocation. An absolute expression may contain relocatable symbols, but they must reduce to pairs of the form (R1-R2), where R1 and R2 are relocatable
symbols defined in the same section in the current source file.

Relocatable Expressions
An expression is relocatable when it is subject to link-time relocation. A relocatable expression contains a relocatable symbol, and may contain an absolute expression. If a relocatable expression contains an absolute expression, it must be reducible to the form (R+K), where R is either a relocatable symbol defined in the current source file, or an undefined symbol, and K is an absolute expression. The address of the relocatable symbol is defined in link time.


Operators
The assembly operators indicate arithmetic or bitwise-logic calculations. Parentheses (()) determine the order in which calculations occur. The assembler evaluates all operators of the same precedence from left to right.
The assembler evaluates all operators according to their level of precedence. Table 2-8 lists the operator precedence rules from lowest to highest.


Table 2-8	Precedence of Arithmetic and Bitwise Logic Operations

PrecedenceOperator Symbol
Operation0 (Low)+Addition-Subtraction|Bitwise inclusive OR^Bitwise exclusive OR1 (Medium)*Multiplication/Division%Remainder<<Shift Left>>Arithmetic shift right&Bitwise AND2 (High)-Unary negation~Unary one's complement
Link-relocation Operators
Link-relocation operators generate link-relocation entries in expressions. See Appendix C for a list of the link-relocation operators.


Statements
An assembly-language program consists of a series of statements separated by a semicolon (;). Multiple statements may be on the same line.
To separate lines, use the standard line termination convention on the local host system, typically CR (carriage return) and LF (line feed). To separate elements within a statement, use the CR, LF, FF (form feed), VT (vertical tab), Space, or Tab that represent white space.
To separate a comment from the code at the end of a statement, insert the comment before the semi colon (;) and precede it with a
double-backslash (//). The assembler ignores comments.
The assembler may place a limit on the length of an input line, but this limit must be no less than 256 characters.
The types of assembly-language statements are as follows:
• label statements
• instruction statements
• directive statements
• assignment statements
• equate statements
• data allocation statements
• cross-section data allocation statements
The following sections detail each of the statement types, their components and syntax, and provide an example of each.

Label Statements
A label statement has the following syntax:
[label]:	// comments
Where:


label	Defines a symbol whose value is the address of the current location counter. If the assembler inserts padding to align the location counter to an implied alignment boundary, the value of the label is not affected.
The assembler interprets a label followed by a double colon (::) as a global symbol. See the "Symbol Scope Declaration" section in Chapter 4 for more information about global symbols.
The following is an example of a global label statement:
foo::

Instruction Statements
An instruction statement has the following syntax:
[label:] [[tag:]] [(qp)] mnemonic[.completers] dests=sources //comments
Where:
label	Defines a symbol whose value is the address of a bundle. When a label is present, the assembler always starts a new bundle.
If the assembler inserts padding to align the location counter to a bundle boundary, the label is assigned the address of the newly-aligned bundle.
The assembler interprets a label followed by a double colon (::) as a global symbol. See the "Symbol Scope Declaration" section in Chapter 4 for more information about global symbols.
[tag ]	Defines a symbol whose value is the bundle address and slot number of the current instruction.
(qp)	Represents a predicate register symbol, which must be enclosed in parentheses. If this field is not defined, predicate register 0 (p0) is the default.


mnemonic.completers
Represents the instruction mnemonic or pseudo-op. Instructions may optionally include one or more completers. Completers must appear in the specified order in the instruction syntax.
Mnemonics and completer mnemonics are not case-sensitive.
Refer to the IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual for a description of the machine instructions, pseudo-ops, and completers.
dests =sources
Represents the destination and source operands. The operands are register names, expressions, or keywords, depending on the instruction. Some instructions can have two destination operands, and one or more source operands. When there are multiple operands they are separated by a comma (,). In cases where all operands are destination operands or all operands are source operands, the equal (=) sign is omitted.
The following is an example of an instruction statement with a label and
(qp):
L5: (p7) addl r14 = @gprel(L0), r1
The following is an example of an instruction statement with a tag:
[t1:] fclass.m.unc p4, p5 = f6, @pos
@pos is a predefined constant representing the fclass operation. p4 is true if f6 is positive.


Directive Statements
A directive statement has the following syntax:
.directive	[operands]	// comments
Where:
.directive	Represents the directive mnemonic. Directives always begin with a period (.). Directive mnemonics are not case-sensitive.
operands  The operands are optional and determined by the directive. Where multiple operands are present in directives, separate them with commas.
The following is an example of a directive statement:
.proc foo

Assignment Statements
Assignment statements enable the programmer to define or redefine a symbol by assigning it a value. This value may be a reference to another symbol, register name, or expression. The new value takes effect immediately and remains in effect until the symbol is redefined. Symbols defined in assignment statements do not have forward references.
In addition, symbols defined in assignment statements cannot:
• appear in the symbol table of an output object file.
• be declared global.
• be defined in an equate statement.
There are two types of assignment statements:
• Symbol assignment statements, which define or redefine a symbol in the symbol name space.
• Register assignment statements, which define or redefine a register name in the symbol name space.


Symbol Assignment Statements
A symbol assignment statement has the following syntax:
identifier=expression	// comments
Where:
identifier	Represents a symbol in the symbol name space.
expression	Specifies the type and value of the identifier. The expression cannot contain forward references.
The following is an example of an assignment statement that defines a symbol:
C = L0+2

Register Assignment Statements
A register assignment statement has the following syntax: identifier=register name	// comments Where:
identifier	Represents a register name in the symbol name space.
register name
Specifies an alternate register name. If the register name is a stack or rotating register name, the new register name continues to reference the previously-defined register name, even if the name is no longer in effect. See the "Register Stack Directive" section and "Rotating Register Directives" section in Chapter 6.
The following is an example of an assignment statement that defines a register name:
A = r1


Equate Statements
Equate statements enable the programmer to define a symbol by assigning it a value. This value may be a reference to another symbol, register name, or expression. In equate statements, a symbol can be defined only once throughout the source file. These symbols may have forward references, except when referencing a register name. A symbol name defined in an equate statement cannot be defined in an assignment statement.
Equate statements have the same syntax as assignment statements, except for the operator.
There are two types of equate statements:
• symbol equate statements
• register equate statements
Symbol Equate Statements
A symbol equate statement has the following syntax: identifier==expression	// comments Where:
identifier	Represents a symbol in the symbol name space.
expression	Specifies the type and value of the identifier. The expression can contain forward references.
The following is an example of an equate statement that defines a symbol:
A == 5

Register Equate Statements
A register equate statement has the following syntax: identifier==register name	// comments Where:
identifier	Represents a register name in the symbol name space.


register name Specifies an alternate register name. The register name cannot contain forward references. If the register name is a stack or rotating register name, the new register name continues to refer to the previously-defined register, even if the name is no longer in effect. See the "Register Stack Directive" section and "Rotating Register Directives" section in Chapter 6.
The following is an example of an equate statement that defines a register name:
A == r1

Data Allocation Statements
A data allocation statement has the following syntax: [label:] dataop operands	// comments Where:
label	Defines a symbol whose value is the address of the first
data object defined by the statement. If the assembler inserts padding to align the location counter to an implied alignment boundary, the label is assigned the value of the newly-aligned address.
The assembler interprets a label followed by a
double-colon (::) as a global symbol. See the "Symbol Scope Declaration" section in Chapter 4 for more information about global symbols.
dataop	Defines the type and size of data objects that are assembled. Data object mnemonics are not
case-sensitive. The "Data Allocation Statements" section in Chapter 5 lists the data object mnemonics.


operands	Contain multiple expressions separated by commas. Each expression defines a separate data object of the same type and size. The assembler puts the data objects into consecutive locations in memory, and automatically aligns each to its natural boundary.
The following is an example of a data-allocation statement with a label:
L2: data4.ua L1, L1+7, .t1+0x34, $-15

Cross-section Data Allocation Statements
A cross-section data allocation statement has the following syntax:
xdataop section-name, operands	//comments
Where:
xdataop	Defines the type and size of data objects that are assembled. Cross-section data object mnemonics are not case-sensitive.
section-name Refers to a predefined name of an existing section in the object file.
operands	Contain multiple expressions that are separated by commas. Each expression defines a separate data object of the same type and size. The assembler puts the data objects into consecutive locations in memory, and automatically aligns each to its natural boundary.
The following is an example of a cross-section data allocation statement:
.xdata8 .data, 0x123, L1









Program Structure	 3 
This chapter describes the overall structure of the IA-64 assembly-language program and explains how to:
• Define sections
• Include contents from other files in the current source file
• Bundle and group instructions
• Define procedures
• Generate symbolic debug information (Windows NT* specific)

Sections
The output object file of an assembly program is made up of named sections that contain code and data. The assembler allows any number of sections to be created in parallel within the output object file, one of which can be accessed at a time. The section currently accessed is referred to as the current section.
The assembler maintains a separate location counter for each existing section. The assembler always adds new code or data to the end of the current section, moving the location counter in that section ahead to incorporate the new code or data. The "Cross-section Data Allocation Statements" section in Chapter 5 explains how to add data to a section that is not the current section.


Section directives and predefined section directives are used to define and switch between sections. Some section directives have flag and type operands that specify the flag and type attributes of a section.

Section Flags and Section Type Operands
The flags operand specifies one or more flag attributes of a section. The
flags operand is a string constant composed of one or more characters.
Table 3-1 lists the valid flag characters. The flags operand is
case-sensitive. The assembler does not detect invalid specifications made by the programmer, such as stores to a section that is a non-writable section. A non-writable section is not flagged by the w flag character.
Table 3-1	Section Flag Characters
Flag Characters	Description

w	Write access allowed.
a	Section is allocated in memory.
x	Section contains executable instructions.
s	Section contains "short" data.

The type operand specifies a section's type attribute. The type operand is a string constant containing one of the valid section types listed in Table 3-2. The section types listed in the table correspond directly to ELF (UNIX*) section types, except for the "comdat" section type, which corresponds to COFF32 (Windows NT). The type operand is
case-sensitive.

Table 3-2	Section Types
Section Type	Description

"progbits"	Sections with initialized data or code.
"nobits"	Sections with uninitialized data (bss).

"comdat"
(Windows NT
specific)

COMDAT sections. See the "Windows NT (COFF32)  Specific Section Flag Operands" section.

"note"	Note sections.


Windows NT (COFF32) Specific Section Flag Operands
In addition to the section flags described in the "Section Flags and Section Type Operands" section, the assembler recognizes the flags listed in Table 3-3 when the section type is "comdat" and the object file format is COFF32 (Windows NT).
These flags represent link-time selection criteria, and are case-sensitive.

Table 3-3	COMDAT Section Flag Characters
Flag	Description

D	Allow only one instance of this section.
Y	Select any one instance of this section.
S	Select any one instance of this section; all instances must be the same size.
E	Select any one instance of this section; all instances must have identical contents.
N	Select the newest instance of this section.
L	Select the largest instance of this section.
T	Section contains thread local storage (tls) data.
A	Select an instance of this section only if the associated section name is selected. See the "Associated Section Name Flag" section.


Associated Section Name Flag
When the A flag is present, the assembler identifies an associated section name. Use the A flag in conjunction with an associated section operand. The associated section operand is a section name. A section name can only be loaded in link time if the associated section is already loaded.
To select the A flag, use the .section or .pushsection directive with an additional assoc-section operand in one of the following formats:
.section section-name [,"flags","type" [,assoc-section]]
.section section-name = "flags","type" [,assoc-section]
.pushsection section-name [,"flags","type" [,assoc-section]]
.pushsection section-name = "flags","type" [,assoc-section]
Where:


section-name Represents a user-defined name using any valid identifier. Section names are case-sensitive.
flags	Represents a string constant composed of one or more characters that specify the attributes of a section. See the Table 3-1 for a list of the valid flag characters.
type	Represents a string constant specifying a type attribute of a section. See Table 3-2 for a list of the section types
assoc-section Represents a user-defined section name.

Section Definition Directive
The .section directive defines new sections, switches from one section to another, and sets the current section. The .section directive has the following formats, with a different functionality for each format:
.section	section-name
.section	section-name,"flags","type"
.section	section-name = "flags","type"
Where:
section-name Represents a user-defined name using any valid identifier. Section names are case-sensitive.
flags	Represents a string constant composed of one or more characters that specify the attributes of a section. See Table 3-1 for a list of the valid flag characters.
type	Represents a string constant specifying a type attribute of a section. See Table 3-2 for a list of the section types.
In the first format, the .section directive sets the section-name as the current section.
In the second format, the .section directive defines a new section, assigns flags and type attributes, and makes the newly-defined section the current section. If the newly-defined section has the same name, flag attributes, and type attribute as a previously-defined existing section, the assembler switches to the previously-defined section without defining a


new one. For example, the following .section directive defines a new section (my_section), assigns flags ("aw") and type ("progbits") attributes, and makes it the current section.
.section	my_section, "aw","progbits"
In the third format, the .section directive creates a new section with a previously-defined section name, and assigns it new flags and type attributes. The newly-created section becomes the current section; any reference to this section name refers to the newly-created section.
The "Using Section Directives" section illustrates how to use the
.section directive.

Section Stack Directives
The assembler maintains a section stack, which is defined by the
.pushsection and.popsection directives. These directives push and pop previously-defined sections to and from the section stack. The assembler may limit the depth of a section stack, but it must allow at least ten levels.
The .pushsection directive pushes the current section onto the stack and switches to the section specified in the directive. The .pushsection directive, like the .section directive, has one of the following formats:
.pushsection	section-name
.pushsection	section-name,"flags","type"
.pushsection	section-name = "flags","type"
Where:
section-name Represents a user-defined name using any valid identifier. Section names are case-sensitive.
flags	Represents a string constant composed of one or more characters that specify the attributes of a section. See Table 3-1 for a list of the valid flag characters.
type	Represents a string constant specifying a type attribute of a section. See Table 3-2 for a list of the section types


The .popsection directive pops the previously-pushed section from the top of the stack, and makes it the current one.
The "Using Section Directives" section illustrates how to use the
.pushsection and .popsection directives.

Absolute Sections
Absolute sections are only supported by ELF object file formats. To define an absolute section with a fixed starting address, use the .section and .pushssection directives with an optional origin operand. The origin operand must be an absolute expression. See the "Absolute Expressions" section in Chapter 2 for more information about absolute expressions. Absolute section addresses cannot overlap. The linker does not merge absolute sections with other section types, or with other absolute sections.
The following example defines a new section name and assigns it new flags and type attributes, with a starting address specified by the origin parameter.
.section	new_name, "aw","progbits",0x1000

Section Return Directive
The .previous directive returns to the previously-defined section of the current section and makes it the current section. This directive does not affect the section stack. The "Using Section Directives" section illustrates how to use this directive.

Predefined Section Directives
The predefined section directives define and switch between commonly-used sections. A predefined section directive creates a new section with the default flags andtype attributes, and makes that section the current section.


The predefined section directive mnemonics are the same as the section names. The assembler generates section names in lower case, even though directive mnemonics are not case-sensitive.
On some platforms the assembler automatically creates a local symbol with a "section" type attribute for each defined section in the object file. See the "Symbol Type Directive" section in Chapter 4 for more information about symbol types.
The linker combines sections with the same name, flags andtype attributes. The linker creates two separate output sections for sections with the same name, but different flags and type attributes.
To define a section without the default flags and type attributes, use the
.section directive.
The predefined section directives cannot define a new section using the same name as a previously-defined section.
Table 3-4 lists the predefined section directives, and their default flags and type attributes. A predefined section directive can have the same name as a section name.

Table 3-4	Predefined Section Directives
Directive/
Section Name	Flags	Type	Usage

.text	"ax"	"progbits"	Read-only object code.
.data	"wa"	"progbits"	Read-write initialized long data.
.sdata	"was"	"progbits"	Read-write initialized short data.
.bss	"wa"	"nobits"	Read-write uninitialized long data.
.sbss	"was"	"nobits"	Read-write uninitialized short data.
.rodata	"a"	"progbits"	Read-only long data (literals). ELF
format only.
.comment   " "	"progbits"   Comments in the object file. ELF
format, and COFF format only when used with the -Q y command-line option.


Using Section Directives
The following code illustrates the use and behavior of the section directives .text, .section, .pushsection, .popsection, and
.previous:


Example 3-1	Code Sequence using Section Directives
.text	//Default
.section A	//Makes A the current section..text is A's previous
//section
.pushsection B //Pushes A onto the stack and makes B the current
//section. A is B's previous section
.pushsection C //Pushes B onto stack and makes C the current section,
// B is C's previous section.
.popsection	//Pops B from stack and makes it current
.popsection	//Pops A from stack and makes it current..text is
// A's previous section
.previous	//Makes A's previously current section .text
// the current section. A becomes .text's
// previous section
.previous	//Makes A the current section, .text becomes A's
	// previous section	

Include File Directive
To include the contents of another file in the current source file, use the
.include directive in the following format:
.include	"filename"
Where:
"filename"	Specifies a string constant. If the specified filename is an absolute pathname, the file is included. If the specified filename is a relative pathname, the assembler performs a platform-dependent search to locate the include file.


Bundles
IA-64 architecture instructions are grouped together in 128-bit aligned containers called bundles. Each bundle contains three 41-bit instruction slots, and a 5-bit template field. The template field specifies which type of execution unit processes each instruction in the bundle. Bit 0 is set to 1 if there is a stop at the end of a bundle. There is no fixed relation between the boundaries of an instruction group and the boundaries of a bundle.
Figure 3-1 illustrates the format of a bundle.

Figure 3-1  Bundle Format



127

87  86

46  45

5	4	0


instruction slot 2instruction slot 1instruction slot 0template41	41	41	5


Multiway branch bundles contain more than one branch instruction. When the first branch instruction of a multiway bundle is taken, the subsequent branch instruction does not execute.
Bundles are always aligned at 16-byte boundaries. The assembler automatically aligns sections containing bundles to at least 16-bytes.
Bundling can be:
• implicit (automatically performed by the assembler)
• explicit (specified by the programmer)
- with automatic selection of the template
- with explicit selection of the template
Refer to the IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual for more details about bundles.


Implicit Bundling
The assembler bundles instructions automatically by default.
In the implicit-bundling mode, section directives do not terminate a partially-filled bundle of a previously-defined section. This means that the assembler can return to the previous section and continue to fill the bundle.
In implicit-bundling mode, a label forces the assembler to start a new bundle.

Explicit Bundling
The programmer can explicitly assemble bundles by grouping together up to three instructions, and enclosing them in braces ({}). The assembler places these instructions in one bundle, separate from all preceding and subsequent instructions. Stops at the end of an explicit bundle can be placed before or after the closing brace.
Section directives and data allocation statements cannot be used within an explicit bundle. Cross-section data allocation statements can be used within an explicit bundle. See the "Cross-section Data Allocation Statements" section in Chapter 5 for more information.
In explicit-bundling mode, labels can be inserted only as the first statement of an explicit bundle. Instruction tags can be applied to any instruction.
When using explicit-bundling, the appropriate template can be selected in one of the following ways:
• automatically by the assembler.
• explicitly by the programmer, using the explicit-template directives.
Auto-template Selection
By default, the assembler searches and selects a matching template for a bundle. The template fields specify intra-bundle instruction stops. When two templates consist of the same sequence of instruction types, they are


distinguished by stops. The assembler selects the appropriate template field based on the stops within the bundle. If no template is found, the assembler produces a diagnostic message. Instruction group stops may occur in a bundle.

Explicit-template Selection
To explicitly select a specific template, use one of the directives listed in Table 3-5, as the first statement of your code within the braces. For example, the.mii directive selects the memory-integer-integer (mii) template.

Table 3-5	Explicit Template Selection Directives
DirectiveTemplate SelectionSlot 0Slot 1Slot 2.mmimemoryintegerinteger.mfimemoryfloating-pointinteger.bbbbranchbranchbranch.mlxmemorylong immediate.mibmemoryintegerbranch.mmbmemorymemorybranch.mmimemorymemoryinteger.mbbmemorybranchbranch.mfbmemoryfloating-pointbranch.mmfmemorymemoryfloating-point
Refer to the IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual for more information about template field encoding and instruction slot mapping.






NOTE. Select the.mlx directive for the move long immediate instruction. This instruction operates on 64-bit data types and is too large to fit into one of the 41-bit bundle slots. This directive selects the mlx template and inserts the instruction in slot 1 and slot 2 of the bundle.


Example 3-2 is code that shows an explicit bundle using explicit template selection, and a stop.
Example 3-2	Bundle with Explicit Template Selection and a Stop
{.mmi	//use the mmi template for this bundle m inst	//memory instruction
;;	//stop
m inst	//memory instruction i inst	//integer instruction
}	

Instruction Groups
IA-64 architecture instructions are organized in instruction groups. Each instruction group contains one or more statically contiguous instruction(s) that can execute in parallel. An instruction group must contain at least one instruction; there is no upper limit on the number of instructions in an instruction group.
An instruction group is terminated statically by a stop, and dynamically by taken branches. Stops are represented by a double semi-colon (;;). The programmer can explicitly define stops. Stops immediately follow an instruction, or appear on a separate line. They can be inserted between two instructions on the same line.
Refer to the IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual for more detailed information about instruction groups.


Dependency Violations and Assembly Modes
Dependency violations occur when instructions within an instruction group access the same resource register, including registers that appear as implicit operands. Dependency violations result in architecturally undefined behavior. The assembler can detect and eliminate dependency violations that occur within instruction groups, depending on its mode.
The assembler reads and processes assembly code in one of two modes: explicit and automatic.
Use explicit mode if you are an expert user with profound knowledge of IA-64 architecture or performance is important. In explicit mode, you are responsible for bundling and stops (;;), and the assembler generates errors where it finds dependency violations.
Use automatic mode if you are a novice user or performance is not the highest consideration. In automatic mode, the assembler bundles the code and adds stops to avoid dependency violations. It ignores existing stops and annotations.
You can mix code from both modes in the one file. Set the mode using the command-line option or the directives .auto and .explicit. The directive .default causes the assembler to revert to the mode of operation defined in the command line.
For a complete description of the rules of data dependencies, see the
IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual.
This feature may not be currently supported by all assemblers.

Procedures
Software conventions require that instructions belong to a declared procedure, and that procedure prologues be separated from the main body within the procedure. These conventions ensure that the proper stack unwind information is placed in the object file. Refer to the IA-64 Software Conventions and Runtime Architecture Guide for details about the software conventions.


Procedure Directives
The .proc and .endp directives combine code belonging to the same procedure. The .proc directive marks the beginning of a procedure, and the .endp directive marks the end of a procedure. A single procedure may consist of several disjointed blocks of code. Each block should be individually bracketed with these directives. Name operands within a procedure can be used only for that specific procedure.
The .proc directive declares a symbol as a function. The .proc directive does not define the symbol by assigning it a value. Symbols must be defined as a label within the procedure. When name is defined, it is automatically assigned a "function" type.
The following code sequence shows the basic format of a procedure:
.proc	name,...
name:	//label
...	//instructions in procedure
.endp	name, ...
Where:

name    Represents one or more entry points of the procedure. Each entry point has a different name. The assembler ignores the name operands of the .endp directive.

Procedure Label (PLabel)
When the object file format is COFF32 (Windows NT), the assembler creates two symbols for a defined procedure. One symbol represents the procedure entry point and appears in the object file symbol table with the original symbol name preceded by a dot. For example, the label named foo becomes.foo in the object file symbol table. The other symbol represents the procedure label, also referred to as the function descriptor or PLabel, and is implicitly generated by the assembler using the original symbol name. Refer to the IA-64 Software Conventions and Runtime Architecture Guide for more information about the procedure label.


Stack Unwind Directives
Stack unwind directives are used to generate unwind information for a procedure.
The IA-64 Software Conventions and Runtime Architecture Guide describes stack unwind elements and their semantics. Refer to this document for information about the semantics of the stack unwind directives described in this section.
Procedures are bound by the .proc and .endp directives. See the "Procedure Directives" section for more information about these directives. Procedures are section-sensitive. The assembler interprets stack unwind directives according to the procedure in which they appear.
Procedures contain prologue and body regions that are divided by headers. These headers are specified using the .prologue and .body directives.
The .prologue directive introduces a prologue region within a procedure. Each prologue region must be introduced by the .prologue directive.
The .body directive separates the procedure prologue from the main body of the procedure. You can use the .body directive more than once within procedures with multiple body regions.
For language specific data, use the .handlerdata directive followed by handler data allocations with the .endp directive after the handler data allocations. The assembler places the handler data in the .xdata section. See the "Stack Unwind Directives Usage Guidelines" section on page
3-22 for more information about using this directive.
These directives may not be currently supported by all assemblers.
Example 3-3 illustrates the format of a procedure with two prologues, two body regions, and language specific data.


Example 3-3	Procedure Format in a Code Sequence
.proc	name,...	//start of procedure



Example 3-3	Procedure Format in a Code Sequence (continued)
.prologue	//instructions in first prologue
.body	//instructions in first body region
.prologue	//instructions in second prologue
.body	//instructions in second body region
.handlerdata	//data allocations go to .xdata section
.endp	name,...	//end of procedure

Stack unwind directives, except for the .endp directive, do not break bundles. When a tag operand is present in a stack unwind directive, the tag refers to a location of an instruction slot. If thetag is omitted, the location default is the location counter of the next instruction. More than one directive can refer to the same location of an instruction slot.
Generally, functions have unwind table entries. A stack unwind directive must be present between the .proc and .endp directives to write function entries and unwind information to the unwind table.
To create a function entry for unwind information when there is no stack unwind information, use the.unwentry directive.
Table 3-6 lists the stack unwind directives and their operands. The
right-most column of the table summarizes the records and fields that are affected by these directives. For more information about the affected records and fields, refer to the IA-64 Software Conventions and Runtime Architecture Guide.
Table 3-6	Stack Unwind Directives


Directive Name
First Operand
Second OperandThird Operan d
Affected Records and Fields.procsymbolentry-start.endpentry-end.handlerdatahandler data allocation.unwentryentry generation

Table 3-6	Stack Unwind Directives (continued)


Directive Name
First Operand
Second OperandThird Operan d
Affected Records and Fields.prologueprologue headerprevious header.prologueimm-maskgrsaveprologue header
previous header.bodybody headerprevious header.personalitysymbol[phases]personality.fframesize[tag]mem_stack_f.vframegr-location[tag]mem_stack_v
psp_gr.vframespspoff[tag]mem_stack_v
psp_sprel.vframepsppspoff[tag]mem_stak_v
pso_psprel.restoresp[ecount][tag]epilogue.copy_statestate_nocopy_state.label_statestate_nolabel_state.saverpgr-location[tag]rp_whenrp_gr.altrpbr-locationrp_br.savesprpimm-location[tag]rp_when
rp_sprel.savepsprpimm-location[tag]rp_when
rp_psprel.savear.fpsrgr_location[tag]fpsr_when
fpsr_gr.savespar.fpsrgr_location[tag]fpsr_when
fpsr_sprel

ThirdFirstSecondOperanAffected RecordsDirective NameOperandOperanddand Fields.savepspar.fpsrimm_location[tag]fpsr_when
fpsr_psprel.savear.bspgr_location[tag]bsp_when
bsp_gr.savespar.bspimm_location[tag]bsp_when
bsp_sprel.savepspar.bspimm_location[tag]bsp_when
bsp_psprel.savear.bspstoregr_location[tag]bspstore_when
bspstore_gr.savespar.bspstoreimm_location[tag]bspstore_when
bspstore_sprel.savepspar.bspstoreimm_location[tag]bspstore_when
bspstore_psprel.savear.rnatgr_location[tag]rnat_when
rnat_gr.savespar.rnatimm_location[tag]rnat_when
rnat_sprel.savepspar.rnatimm_location[tag]rnat_when
rnat_psprel.savear.pfsgr-location[tag]pfs_when
pfs_gr.savespar.pfsimm-location[tag]pfs_when
pfs_sprel.savepspar.pfsimm-location[tag]pfs_when
pfs_psprel.savear.unatgr-location[tag]natcr_when
natcr_gr

Table 3-6	Stack Unwind Directives (continued)
ThirdFirstSecondOperanAffected RecordsDirective NameOperandOperanddand Fields.savespar.unatimm-location[tag]natcr_when
natcr_sprel.savepspar.unatimm-location[tag]natcr_when
natcr_psprel.savear.lcgr-location[tag]lc_when
lc_gr.savespar.lcimm-location[tag]lc_when
lc_sprel.savepspar.lcimm-location[tag]lc_when
lc_psprel.saveprgr-location[tag]preds_when
preds_gr.savespprimm-location[tag]preds_when
preds_sprel.savepspprimm-location[tag]preds_when
preds_psprel.save@priunatgr_location[tag]priunat_when
priunat_gr.savesp@priunatimm_location[tag]priunat_when
priunat_sprel.savepsp@priunatimm_location[tag]priunat_when
priunat_psprel.save.gimm-grmaskgr_mem
spill_imask.save.gimm_grmaskgr_location[tag]gr_gr imask.save.fimm-frmaskfr_memspill_imask


Directive Name


First Operand


Second Operand

Third Operan d


Affected Records and Fields

.save.b	imm-brmask	br_mem spill_imask
.save.gf	imm-grmask	imm-frmask	frgr_mem spill_imask
.save.b	imm-brmask	gr-location	br_gr
spill_imask
.spill	imm-location	spill_base
.unwabi	@svr4	imm_context	abi
.unwabi	@hpux	imm_context	abi
.unwabi	@nt	imm_context	abi
The following alphabetical list defines the stack unwind directive operands listed in Table 3-6:
• br-location is the alternative branch register used to get the return link. By default, b0 is the return link.
• ecount is the number of prologues -1 specified by the assembler if this field is not specified by the user.
• gr-location is a general-purpose register that specifies the destination of the save operation. For example, registers r1 and loc1.
• grsave saves the rp, ar.pfs, psp, and pr register contents to the first general-purpose register.
• imm-location (immediate location) is the offset between the sp or psp, and the save_address, specified in bytes. This offset is always positive and specified as follows:
• imm-mask (immediate mask) is an integer constant specifying a bit pattern for the preserved registers, as follows:
- The immediate mask (imm-mask) of the .prologue directive is specified as follows: rp (return link) (bit 3), ar.pfs register (bit 2), psp (previous stack pointer) (bit 1), pr register (bit 0)


- The immediate mask (imm-frmask) of the .save.f and
.save.gf directives refer to the preserved floating-point registers.
- The immediate mask (imm-grmask) of the .save.g and
.save.gf directives refer to the preserved general registers.
- The immediate mask (imm-brmask) of the .save.b directive refers to the preserved branch registers.
sp_offset: imm-location = save_address - sp_address psp_offset: imm-location = psp_address - save_address
• phases is the number of phases (0 to 3).
• @priunat is a predefined symbol and indicates a primary unit.
• size is the fixed frame size in bytes.
• sp, rp, ar.pfs, ar.unat, ar.lc, and pr are explicit register names.
• state_no is the state copied or restored.
• @svr4, @hpux, and @nt specify the operating system type.
• symbol is an assembly label.
• tag is an optional operand, which specifies a "when" attribute of the operation described by the directive.

Syntax for the .save.x Directives
The directives, .save.f, .save.g, .save.gf, and .save.b, define 2-bit fields for each save operation in the imask descriptor. The assembler interprets the instruction that immediately follows a save directive as a save instruction.
Example 3-4 illustrates the use of the .save.g directive. Each .save.g directive describes the subsequent store instruction. The operand is a mask where only one bit is set. This bit specifies the preserved saved register. The assembler produces a gr_mem descriptor with a 0x5 mask. In addition, the assembler marks the 2-bit fields of the imask descriptor, corresponding to the slots of the two store instructions.



Example 3-4	Code Sequence Using the .save.g Directive
.save.g 0x1 st8... = r4
...
.save.g 0x4
st8... = r6	

Example 3-5 illustrates the use of the .save.gf directive. The .save.gf directive describes the subsequent store instruction. The operands is a mask where only one bit is set. This bit specifies the preserved saved register. The assembler produces a frgr_mem descriptor with a 0x42 mask for the floating-point registers and a 0x2 mask for the
general-purpose registers. In addition, the assembler marks the 2-bit fields of the imask descriptor, corresponding to the slots of the three store instructions.


Example 3-5	Code Sequence Using the .save.gf Directive
.save.gf 0, 0x2 fst... = f3
...
.save.gf 0, 0x40 fst... = f18
...
.save.gf 0x2, 0
st8... = r5	

Stack Unwind Directives Usage Guidelines
Follow these guidelines when using the stack unwind directives:
• Place stack unwind directives between the unwind entry point of the function declared in .proc and .endp.
• The first directive in each region in a procedure must be one of the following region header directives, .prologue or .body.
• The first directive in the procedure must point to the same address as the first unwind entry point of the function.


• Region header directives should alternate. No two consecutive regions of the same type are allowed.
• When none of the stack unwind directives listed in Table 3-6 are specified, optionally use the .unwentry directive to create an unwind entry for the function. Do not use this directive if the unwind records are filled by the compiler.
• Use tags only within the current region. A tag operand cannot be specified out of the scope region. If a tag is omitted, the directive refers to the next instruction, which resides in the same region.
• Use only one .personality directive at any point within each procedure.
• Always precede the .handlerdata directive with the.personality directive.
• Follow these guidelines for prologue regions:
- Use one of the following frame directives: .fframe, .vframe, or
.vframesp.
- Use each of the .save directives only once. For example: .save rp, ar.pfs, ar.unat, ar.lc, and pr.
- Multiple usage of the directives, .save.g, .save.f, .save.b, and.save.gf is allowed. The number of bits set in the bit-mask operand specifies the number of the consecutive save instructions that immediately follow the directive.
- A single unwind record is built for one or more occurrences of the following directives: .save.g, .save.f, .save.b, and.save.gf. The bit-mask field of the record is a bitwise OR of all the masks that appear in the directives.
- Use only one.save.b with the gr-location operand.
- Use only one .spill directive.
• Use only one .restore directive for body regions.


Windows NT (COFF32) Symbolic Debug Directives
When the object file format is COFF32 (Windows NT), the symbolic debug directive .ln stores the line number table entry of a function in the symbolic debug information. The symbolic debug directive .ln must be enclosed within a function defined by the.bf and .ef directives.The .bf and .ef directives define the beginning and the end of a function.
The .ln directive has the following format:
.ln	line-number[,function]
Where:
line-number	Specifies the source line number associated with the next assembled instruction.
function	Is the name of the current function. The .bf and .ef directives have the following format:
.bf	function,line
.ef	function,line,code-size
Where:
function	Represents the function name.
line	Is an integer number corresponding to the first source line of the function.
code-size	Is an integer number representing line group code size, which is written as debug information.







Declarations	 4 
This chapter describes the IA-64 assembly-language directives associated with symbol declarations. These directives can be used to perform the following functions:
• Declare symbol scopes
• Specify symbol types
• Specify symbol sizes
• Override default file names
• Declare common symbols
• Declare aliases for labels, function names, symbolic constants, or sections

Symbol Scope Declaration
Symbols are declared as global, weak, or local scopes. Symbol scopes are used to resolve symbol references within one object file or between multiple object files. The symbol scope attribute is placed in the object file symbol table and any reference to a symbol is resolved in link time. By default, symbols have a local scope, where they are available only to the current assembly-language source file in which they are defined.


Local Scope Declaration Directive
References to symbols with a local scope are resolved from within the object file in which the symbols are declared. Local symbols with the same name in different object files do not refer to the same entity.
Symbols have a local scope by default, so it is not necessary to declare symbols with local scopes. However, the.local directive is available for completeness. The .local directive has the following format:
.local	name,name, ...
Where:
name	Represents a symbol name.

Global Scope Declaration Directive
References to symbols with a global scope are resolved within the object file in which the symbols are declared, and within other object files.
Global symbols with the same name in different object files refer to the same entity.
To declare one or more symbols with a global scope, use the .global directive. These symbols are flagged as global symbols for the linkage editor. The .global directive has the following format:
.global	name,name, ...
Where:
name	Represents a symbol name.

Weak Scope Declaration Directive
References to symbols with a weak scope are resolved within the object file in which the symbols are declared, and within other object files. Weak symbols with the same name in different object files may not refer to the same entity. When a symbol name is declared with a weak scope as well as a global or local scope, the global or local scope will take precedence over the weak scope in link time.


To declare one or more symbols with a weak scope, use the .weak directive.These symbols are flagged as weak symbols for the linkage editor. The weak scope declaration format for UNIX* (ELF) and Windows NT (COFF32) differ and are described in the sections that follow.

Weak Scope Declaration for UNIX (ELF)
For UNIX (ELF), use the .weak directive in the following format:
.weak	name1,name2, ...
Where:
name	Represents a symbol name.
The following example illustrates how to declare an undefined symbol with a weak scope. The defined symbol x: has a local scope. y has the attributes of x and has a local scope. The symbol y can then be declared with a weak scope using the .weak directive while keeping the other attributes of x.
x:
y == x
.weak y

Weak Scope Declaration for Windows NT (COFF32)
For Windows NT (COFF32), use the .weak directive in the following format to declare a symbol with a weak scope and search for defined symbols within other object files and libraries:
.weak	identifier1 = identifier2
identifier1	Represents a symbol name that is assigned a weak symbol scope, which is resolved in link time.
identifier2	Represents a symbol name that holds the symbol definition.
Use the following syntax to declare a symbol with a weak scope and search for defined symbols within other object files and not within libraries:
.weak	identifier1 == identifier2


Where:
identifier1	Represents a symbol name that is assigned a weak symbol scope, which is resolved in link time.
identifier2	Represents a symbol name that holds the symbol definition.
The following example illustrates a weak scope declaration where x: is a local defined symbol. x is the associated symbol for y. The .weak directive assigns y a weak scope.
x:
.weak y = x

Symbol Type Directive
The default type of a symbol in an object file is based on the
assembly-time type of the symbol. See Table 4-1 for a list of the symbol types and their predefined names. To explicitly specify a symbol's type, use the .type directive in the following format:
.type	name,type
Where:
name	Represents a symbol name.
type	Specifies the symbol type using one of the predefined symbols listed in Table 4-1.


Table 4-1	Symbol Types

Symbol Types



Predefined Symbol Name of Type



Symbolic constants and undefined symbols	@notype
Labels and common symbols	@object
Function names	@function
Section names	Created by the assembler.




NOTE. The assembler automatically creates a symbol of type name for section names.
When the object file format is COFF32 (Windows NT) the assembler creates a function symbol name for @function. For more information see the "Procedure Label (PLabel)" section in Chapter 3.


Symbol Size Directive
To explicitly specify the size attribute of a symbol, use the .size
directive.
The .size directive has the following format:
.size	name,size
Where:
name	Represents a symbol name.
size	Represents an absolute integer expression with no forward references.
To implicitly specify the default size attribute of a symbol, use a data allocation statement. The default symbol size is written to the symbol table. See the "Data Allocation Statements" section in Chapter 5 for more information.

NOTE. When the object file format is COFF32 (Windows NT), the
.size directive is only effective for common symbols.



File Name Override Directive
By default, the file name is the name of the source file. To override the default file name use the .file directive. If you use the .file directive more than once in a source file, the assembler places multiple file names in the output object file. The .file directive has the following format:
.file	"name"
Where:
"name"	Represents a string constant specifying a source file name.

Common Symbol Declarations
Common and local common symbol declarations enable you to define a symbol with the same name in different object files. The difference between a common symbol and local common symbol is as follows:
• The linker merges two or more common symbol declarations for the same symbol.
• The assembler merges two or more local common symbol declarations for the same symbol.
If a symbol is declared as both common and local common, the common declaration overrides the local common declaration. Any definition of a symbol supersedes either type of common declaration.

Common Symbol Directive
To declare a symbol as a common symbol, use the .common directive. Common symbols have a global scope, and do not necessarily have the same size and alignment attributes. The .common directive has the following format:
.common	name,size,alignment


Where:
name	Represents a symbol name.
size	Represents an absolute integer expression.
alignment	Represents an absolute integer expression to the power of two. Not supported in COFF32 format.

NOTE. When the object file format is COFF32 (Windows NT), the
alignment operand is not supported.



Local Common Symbol Directive
To declare a symbol as a local common symbol use the .lcomm directive. The .lcomm directive has the following format:
.lcomm	name,size,alignment
Where:
name	Represents a symbol name.
size	Represents an absolute integer expression.
alignment	Represents an absolute integer expression to the power of two.
The assembler allocates storage in the.bss or .sbss sections for undefined symbols declared as local common. The .bss or .sbss sections are chosen according to the size of the local common symbol. The assembler defines the symbol with the relocatable address of the allocated storage. The symbol is declared with a local scope, and assigned the largest size and alignment attributes of the local common declarations for that symbol.


Alias Declaration Directives
The .alias directive declares an alias for a label, a function name, or a symbolic constant. This directive can be used to reference an external symbol whose name is not legal in the assembly language. The .alias directive has the following format:
.alias	symbol,"alias"
Where:
symbol	Represents a symbol name that the assembler can recognize. This name must be a valid name for the type of symbol.
"alias"	Represents a string constant, which is the name the assembler exports to the object file symbol table.
The .secalias directive declares an alias for a section name. This directive can be used to reference an external section whose name is not legal in the assembly language. The .secalias directive has the following format:
.secalias	section-name,"alias"
Where:
section-name Represents a section name that the assembler can recognize. This name must be a valid name for the type of section.
"alias"	Represents a string constant, which is the name the assembler exports to the object file symbol table.







Data Allocation	 5 
This chapter describes the IA-64 assembly language statements used to allocate initialized and unitialized space for data objects in current sections and in cross sections, and to align data objects in sections of the code.

Data Allocation Statements
Data allocation statements allocate space for data objects in the current section, and initialize the space by assigning it a value. Data objects can be integer numbers, floating-point numbers, or strings. Integer numbers and floating point numbers are aligned according to their size. A data allocation statement with a label, defines a symbol of @object type, and sets the size attribute for that symbol.
Data allocation statements have any of the following formats:
[label: ] data1 expression, ... [label: ] data2 expression, ... [label: ] data4 expression, ... [label: ] data8 expression, ... [label: ] real4 expression, ... [label: ] real8 expression, ... [label: ] real10 expression, ... [label: ] real16 expression, ... [label: ]  string "string", ...


[label: ]	stringz "string", ...
Where:
label	Specifies the data allocation address of the first data object.
expression	Represents any of the valid expression types listed in Table 5-1. Data allocation statements can have more than one expression operand.
string	Represents any of the valid string expression type values listed in Table 5-1.
Table 5-1 summarizes the data allocation mnemonics, and their expression type, memory format, data-object size, and alignment boundary for each.

Table 5-1	Data Allocation Statements

MnemonicExpression Type
Memory FormatSize
(in bytes)
Alignmentdata1IntegerInteger11data2IntegerInteger22data4IntegerInteger44data8IntegerInteger88real4Floating-point or integerIEEE single precision floating-point44real8Floating-point orIEEE double precision floating-point88integerreal10Floating-point or integerIEEE extended precision floating-point (80-bit)1016real16Floating-point or integerIEEE extended precision floating-point (80-bit)1616stringString constantArray of ASCII charactersLength of string1stringzString constantArray of ASCII characters, with null terminatorLength of string + 11

To disable the automatic alignment of data objects in data allocation statements, add the .ua completer after the mnemonic, for example, data4.ua. These statements allocate unaligned data objects at the current location within the current section.
The default byte order for data allocation statements is platform dependant. To specify the byte order for data allocation statements, use the .msb, or .lsb directives described in the "Byte Order Specification Directives" section in Chapter 6.

Uninitialized Space Allocation
The .skip and .org statements reserve uninitialized space in a section without assigning it a value.
The .skip and.org statements enable the assembler to reserve space in any section type, including a "nobits" section. During program execution, the contents of a "nobits" section are initialized as zero by the operating system program loader. When using the .skip and.org statements in any other section type, the assembler initializes the reserved space with zeros.
The .skip statement reserves a block of space in the current section. The size of the block is specified in bytes, and is determined by an expression operand. The expression operand specifies the size of space reserved in the current section. The .skip statement with a label, defines a symbol of @object type, and sets the size attribute for that symbol.
The .skip statement has the following format:
[label: ]	.skip	expression
Where:
label	Specifies the data allocation address of the beginning of the reserved block.


expression	Represents an absolute integer expression with no forward references. The location counter advances to a location relative to the current location within the section. This operand cannot have a negative value since the location counter cannot be reversed.
The .org statement reserves a block of space in the current section. The
.org statement advances the location counter to the location specified by the expression operand. The .org statement with a label defines a symbol of @object type, and sets the size attribute for that symbol.
The .org statement has the following format:
[label:]	.org	expression
Where:
label	Specifies the data allocation address of the beginning of the reserved block.
expression	Represents an integer, or a relocatable expression, with no forward references. If the expression is relocatable, it must be reducible to the form R+K, where R is a symbol previously defined in the current section, and K is an absolute constant. The location counter is set to the indicated offset relative to the beginning of the section.
Since the location counter cannot be reversed, this operand must be greater than, or equal to, the current location counter.

Alignment
Instructions and data objects are aligned on natural alignment boundaries within a section. To disable automatic alignment of data objects in data allocation statements, add the .ua completer after the data allocation mnemonic, for example, data4.ua. Bundles are aligned at 16-byte boundaries, and data objects are aligned according to their size. The assembler does not align string data, since they are byte arrays.


Each section has an alignment attribute, which is determined by the largest aligned object within the section.
Section location counters are not aligned automatically. To align the location counter in the current section to a specified alignment boundary use the .align statement. The .align statement has the following format:
.align	expression
Where:
expression	Is an integer number that specifies the alignment boundary of the location counter in the current section. The integer must be a power of two.
The .align statement enables the assembler to reserve space in any section type, including a "nobits" section. During program execution time the contents of a "nobits" section are initialized as zero by the operating system program loader. When using the .align statement in any other section type, the assembler initializes the reserved space with zeros for non-executable sections, and with a NOP pattern for executable sections.

NOTE. When the object file format is COFF32 (Windows NT) the section alignment boundary is limited to 8KB. The assembler does not guarantee alignment for requests above 8KB.


Cross-section Data Allocation Statements
Cross-section data allocation statements add data to a section that is not the current section. These statements save the overhead of switching between sections using the .section directive. See the "Sections" section in Chapter 3 for more information about switching between sections.
Cross-section data allocation statements may be used within an explicit


bundle. All data objects are aligned to their natural boundaries in the cross section. Cross-section data allocation statements have any of the following formats:
.xdata1	section,expression, ...
.xdata2	section,expression, ...
.xdata4	section,expression, ...
.xdata8	section,expression, ...
.xstring	section,"string", ...
.xstringz	section,"string", ...
Where:
section	Represents the name of a previously-defined section that is not the current section.
expression	Represents an absolute or relocatable integer expression. When these expressions reference a location counter, they refer to the location counter within the cross section, not within the current section.
string	Represents any of the valid string expression type values listed in Table 5-1.
To disable automatic alignment of data objects in a cross-section data allocation statement, add the .ua completer to the statement, for example,
.xdata4.ua. These statements allocate unaligned data objects at the current location counter of the cross section, not the current section.
The default byte order for cross-section data allocation statements is platform dependent. The byte order is determined by the cross section, not by the current section.







Miscellaneous Directives	 6 
This chapter describes the following IA-64 assembly-language directives:
• Register stack directive
• Rotating register directives
• Byte-order specification directive
• Ident string specification directive
• Radix indicator directive
• Preprocessor support

Register Stack Directive
The IA-64 architecture provides a mechanism for register renaming. Register renaming is implemented by allocating a register stack frame consisting of input, local, and output registers. These registers can be renamed. These renamable registers map to the general registers r32 through r127. The assembler provides predefined alternate register names for the input, local, and output register areas of the register stack frame. The mapping of these registers to the general registers is determined by the nearest preceding alloc instruction.
Refer to the IA-64 Architecture Software Developer's Manual for detailed information about register renaming and for a full description of the alloc instruction.


The .regstk directive replaces the default register mappings defined by a preceding alloc instruction with new mappings. The .regstk directive does not allocate a new register stack frame.
The .regstk directive has the following format:
.regstk	ins, locals, outs, rotators
Where:
ins	Represents the number of input registers in the general register stack frame.
in0 through inins-1 represent r32 through r31+ins for ins > 0.
locals	Represents the number of local registers in the general register stack frame state.
loc0 through loclocals-1 represent r32+ins through
r31+ins+locals for locals > 0.
outs	Represents the number of output registers in the general register stack frame.
out0 through outouts-1 represent r32+ins+locs through
r31+ins+locals+outs for outs > 0.
rotators	Represents the number of rotating registers in the general register frame. rotators must be <= ins+locals+outs.

The in, loc, and out register names defined by a previous.regstk directive or alloc instruction are visible by all subsequent instructions until the next .regstk directive or alloc instruction is specified.
The alternate register names specified by the operands of the .regstk directive refer to registers in the current register stack frame. If you reference input, local, or output registers using the alternate register names that are not within the current stack frame, the assembler produces an error message.


To prevent referencing the alternate register names, use the .regstk directive without the operands. The operands of a subsequent .regstk directive or alloc instruction redefine the mappings of the alternate register names.
The alloc instruction and.regstk directive do not affect the names of the general registers, r32 through r127.

Stacked Registers in Assignment and Equate Statements
To define an alternate register name for a stacked register, use an assignment statement. The alternate register name is not affected by any subsequent changes to the rotating register. See the "Assignment Statements" and "Equate Statements" sections in Chapter 2 for more details about assignment and equate statements.
Example 6-1 illustrates how to define an alternate register name using an assignment statement, so that the alternate register name is not affected by a subsequent .regstk directive. The local register name loc0 maps to the general register r36. loc0 is assigned to tmp. The subsequent add instruction refers to loc0, which is currently mapped to r40. The next add instruction refers to tmp which is mapped to r36, not r40.
Example 6-1	Defining a Stacked Register in an Assignment Statement
.regstk
tmp	= loc0
...
.regstk4,4,2,0

8,1,3,0
//loc0
is currently r36add addloc0 = r1,r7 r1 = r2,tmp//loc0
// tmpis currently r40
= r36!
Rotating Register Directives
General registers, floating-point registers, and predicate registers contain a subset of rotating registers. This subset of rotating registers can be renamed.


The following directives enable the programmer to provide names for one or more registers within each rotating register region:
• .rotr	for general registers
• .rotf	for floating-point registers
• .rotp	for predicate registers
The .rotx directives assign alternate names and generation numbers for the rotating registers. One generation corresponds to one iteration of a software-pipelined loop. Each copied register is numbered with an index, where the most recent copy of a register has a zero index, such as b[0]. For every loop iteration, the registers within the group are renamed, and become one generation older by incrementing the index by one.
The .rotx directives define the number of instances of each pipeline variable and allocate them in the appropriate rotating register region. You can use an arbitrary name with a subscript-like notation for referencing the current and previous generations of each variable.
The rotating register directives have the following format:
.rotr	name [expression], ...
.rotf	name [expression], ...
.rotp	name [expression], ...
Where:
name	Represents a register name specified by the user, and represents a pipelined variable.
expression	Specifies the number of generations needed for the variable. The expression must be an absolute integer expression with no forward references.
When the alias rotating register names are used as instruction operands, they have the following format:
name[expression]


Where:
name	Represents an alias rotating register name defined by one of the rotating register directives.
expression	Represents an absolute integer expression with no forward references. The index must be between 0 and (n-1), where n is the number of generations defined for that name. If the index is negative, or greater than (n-1), the assembler produces an error message.
The .rotr, .rotf, and .rotp directives cancel all previous alias names associated with the appropriate register file, before defining new register names. The register files include the general, floating-point, and predicate registers.
If the number of rotating general registers implied by a .rotr directive exceeds the number of rotating registers declared by the nearest preceding alloc instruction, or .regstk directive, the assembler issues a warning.

Using Rotating Register directives
Example 6-2 and Example 6-3 illustrate the behaviour of the .rotp and
.rotf directives, respectively.
Example 6-2 illustrates how the.rotp directive declares alternate rotating predicate register names for two predicate registers, p[2], and three predicate registers q[3]. Instructions subsequent to the .rotp directive refer to p[0] for the current generation of p, and p[1] for the previous generation of p. For the current generation of q, the subsequent instructions refer to q[0], q[1] for the previous generation, and q[2] for the one before the previous generation.


Example 6-2	Using the .rotp Directive
.rotp p[2],q[3]



Example 6-2	Using the .rotp Directive (continued)
The alternate predicate register names map to the predicate registers as follows:
p[0] = p16; p[1] = p17
q[0] = p18; q[1] = p19; q[2] = p20	
Example 6-3 illustrates how the .rotf directive declares alternate floating-point register names for three floating-point registers x[3], two floating-point registers y[2], and three floating-point registers z[3].


Example 6-3	Using the .rotf Directive
.rotf	x[3],y[2],z[3]

The alternate floating-point register names map to the floating-point registers as follows:
x[0]=f32;x[1]=f33;x[2]=f34 y[0]=f35;y[1]=f36
z[0]=f37;z[1]=f38;z[2]=f39	

Rotating Registers in Assignment and Equate Statements
To define an alias name for a rotating register, use an assignment statement. The alias register name is not affected by any subsequent changes to the rotating register. See the "Assignment Statements" and "Equate Statements" sections in Chapter 2 for more details about assignment and equate statements.
Example 6-4 illustrates how to define an alias name using an assignment statement so that the alias name is not affected by a subsequent .rotr directive. The .rotr directive maps b[1] to general register r36. b[1] is assigned to tmp. The second .rotr directive defines the new mapping of b[1] to r33. The subsequent add instruction that refers to b[1] is currently mapped to r33. The second add instruction refers to tmp, which is mapped to r36, not r33.



Example 6-4	Defining an Alias Name in an Assignment Statement
.rotr	a[3],b[2],c[4]
tmp	= b[1]//b[1]is currently r36....rotrb[4],c[3],d[2]addb[1] = r1,r7//b[1]is currently r33addr1 = r2,tmp// tmp= r36!
Byte Order Specification Directives
The .msb and .lsb directives determine the byte order of data assembled by the datan , realn , and .xdatan data allocation statements. The values of n for data and .xdata are 1, 2, 4, and 8. The values of n for real are 4, 8, 10, and 16. See Chapter 5 for more information about data allocation statements.
The .msb and .lsb directives change the byte order for current sections only. They do not affect the instructions that are assembled. They only affect the data created. The default byte order is little-endian.
The .msb directive switches to MSB, where the most-significant byte is stored at the lowest address (big-endian). The .lsb directive switches to LSB, where the least-significant byte is stored at the lowest address (little-endian).
The byte order is a property of each section. If the byte order is changed in one section, it remains in effect for that section until the byte order is redefined. This change does not affect the byte order of other sections in the assembly program.

String Specification Directive
The .ident directive places a null terminated string in the .comment section of an output object file. See the use of .comment in  Chapter 3,  "Program Structure". The .ident directive has the following format:
.ident  "string"


Where:
"string"	Represents a string.

Radix Indicator Directive
The .radix directive selects the numeric constant style.
To select a MASM numeric constant and specify a radix indicator, use the
.radix directive in the following format:
.radix	[radix-indicator]
Where:
radix-indicator
Indicates a MASM (Microsoft* macro assembler) numeric constant and specifies the radix. See Table 2-6 in Chapter 2, for a list of the radix indicators.
The MASM numeric constant and radix remain in effect until redefined.
To select a C numeric constant, use the .radix directive in the following format:
.radix	[C]
Where:
C	Indicates a C numeric constant.
The .radix directive used with an operand, pushes the previous numeric constant style and radix onto a radix stack. The .radix directive without the radix-indicator operand, pops and restores the previous style and radix from the stack. The assembler may limit the depth of a radix stack, but this limit must be no less than 10 levels.

Preprocessor Support
The assembler recognizes a special filename and the line number directive (#line) inserted by the standard C preprocessor, and sets its record as the current filename and line number accordingly. The #line directive has the following format:


#line	line_number, filename
Where:
line_number	Specifies the source line number
filename	Identifies the name of the current filename. Additionally, the assembler supports the following built-in symbols: @line	Current line number
@filename	Current filename
@filepath	Current file path









Annotations	 7 
Annotations are a subset of the assembler directives. They explicitly provide additional information for the assembler during the assembly process.
These annotations have the same format and syntax as all other directives. This chapter describes these annotations and their functionality.
The annotations covered in this chapter include
• .pred.rel
• .pred.vector
• .mem.offset
• .entry

Predicate Relationship Annotation
The predicate relationship annotation .pred.rel provides information for the assembler about a logical relationship between the values of predicate registers. It is relevant only for explicit code.
The annotation .pred.rel takes the following forms:
"mutex"	mutual exclusion
"imply"	implication
"clear"	clear existing relations
When conflicting instructions follow an entry point, IAS ignores all existing predicate relationships defined before the entry point.


Predicate Vector Annotation
The predicate vector annotation .pred.vector explicitly specifies the predicate register contents using a user-defined value. The user-defined value is represented by a 64-bit binary number and each bit corresponds to a predicate register, respectively. A second optional operand can be used as a mask to selectively set only some of the predicate registers. Currently this annotation is ignored by the IA-64 Assembler.
This annotation takes effect at the point of insertion and the assembler may use this information for further analysis. The .pred.vector annotation has the following syntax:
.pred.vector	val [,mask]
Where:
val	Specifies a number represented as a 64-bit binary number. Each bit represents a 1-bit value in each of the corresponding 64 predicate registers. If val is not within the 64-bit range, this annotation is ignored.
mask	Represents an optional mask value used to define a subset of the predicate register file.
Example 7-1 illustrates a predicate vector annotation that sets the predicate registers according the specified value 0x9, and uses a mask of 0xffff to define a subset of the predicate register file.

Example 7-1 Using a Predicate Vector Annotation with a Mask
.pred.vector 0x9, 0xffff	//only refers to lowest 16-bits that
are set in the mask. Values of p0-p15 are defined.


Memory Offset Annotation
The memory offset annotation .mem.offset provides hints about the address that memory operations address, when the exact address is unknown. The annotation is useful for avoiding false reports of dependency violations. The annotation affects the instruction that follows.



The .mem.offset annotation has the following syntax:
.mem.offset	off_val,base_ind
Where:
off_val	The relative offset for the memory region where the data is stored or retrieved.
base_ind	A number that identifies the memory region where the information is stored or retrieved. The number is an arbitrary method of distinguishing between different memory regions.
Example 7-2 illustrates a .mem.offset annotation.

Example 7-2  Using the Memory Offset Annotation
.proc foo foo::
FOO_STACK_INDEX=0
...	//code...
.mem.offset 0,FOO_STACK_INDEX	//Suppose r3 contains the stack pointer st8.spill [r3]=r32,8	//We want to save r32-r34
.mem.offset 8,FOO_STACK_INDEX st8.spill [r3]=r33,8
.mem.offset 16,FOO_STACK_INDEX st8.spill [r3]=r34,8
.endp
.proc bar bar::
.BAR_STACK_INDEX=1
...	//code...
.mem.offset 0,BAR_STACK_INDEX	//Suppose r3 contains the stack pointer st8.spill [r3]=r40	//We want to save r40



Entry Annotation
The entry annotation .entry notifies the assembler that a label can be entered from another function. By default, only global labels, designated by
<label>::, are considered entry points. The annotation and the label need not be consecutive.


The .entry annotation has the following syntax:
.entry	label [, labels...]
Where:
label	Represents the associated label.

Example 7-3  Using the Entry Annotation
.entry A	//entry annotation A: mov r1=r2








Register Names by Type	 A 
Table A-1 through Table A-8 list the IA-64 architecture registers and their names.

Table A-1General RegistersRegisterRegister NameFixed general registersr0 - r31Stacked general registersr32 - r127Alternate names for input registersin0 - in95Alternate names for local registersloc0 - loc95Alternate names for output registersout0 - out95Global pointer (r1)gpReturn value registers (r8-r11)ret0 - ret3Stack pointer (r12)spTable A-2Floating-point RegistersRegisterRegister NameFloating-point registersf0 - f127Argument registers (f8-f15)farg0 - farg7Return value registers (f8-f15)fret0 - fret7










Table A-3Predicate RegistersRegisterRegister NamePredicatesp0 - p63All predicatesprRotating predicatespr.rotTable A-4Branch RegistersRegisterRegister NameBranch registersb0 - b7Return pointer (b0)rpTable A-5Application RegistersRegisterRegister NumberRegister NameApplication registers by number0 -127ar0 - ar127Kernel registers0 -7ar.k0 - ar.k7RSE control register16ar.rscBacking store pointer17ar.bspBacking store "store" pointer18ar.bspstoreRSE NaT collection register19ar.rnatCompare & Exchange comparison value32ar.ccvUser NaT collection register36ar.unatFloating-point status register40ar.fpsrInterval time counter44ar.itcPrevious frame state64ar.pfsLoop counter65ar.lcEpilog counter66ar.ec


Table A-6	Control Registers
Register	Register Number	Register Name

Control registers by number0-127cr0 - cr127Default control register0cr.dcrInterval time match1cr.itmInterruption vector address2cr.ivaPage table address8cr.ptaInterruption processor status register16cr.ipsrInterruption status register17cr.isrInterruption data address18cr.idaInterruption instruction pointer19cr.iipInterruption data translation register20cr.idtrInterruption instruction translation register21cr.iitrInterruption instruction previous address22cr.iipaInterruption frame state23cr.ifsInterruption immediate24cr.iimInterruption hash address25cr.ihaExternal interrupt registers66cr.lid71cr.ivr72cr.tpr75cr.eoi96,98,100,102cr.irr0 cr.irr3-114cr.itv116cr.pmv117- 118cr.lrr0 -cr.lrr1119cr.cmcv










Register	Register Name

Processor status register	psr

Processor status register, lower 32 bits	psr.l
User mask	psr.um

Instruction pointer	ip

Table A-8	Indirect-register Files
Register	Register Name

Performance monitor control registers	pmc[r]

Performance monitor data registers	pmd[r]
Protection key registers	pkr[r]

Region registers	rr[r]
Instruction breakpoint registers	ibr[r]

Data breakpoint registers	dbr[r]
Instruction translation registers	itr[r]

Data translation registers	dtr[r]
Processor identification register	CPUID[r]








Pseudo-ops	 B 
Table B-1 lists the assembly language pseudo-ops for the IA-64 architecture according to their opcodes. Table B-2 lists pseudo-ops with missing operands.
The opcodes are listed alphabetically, with their operands, and the equivalent machine instructions. The table lists mnemonics converted to other mnemonics.

Table B-1Pseudo-ops Listed by OpcodeInstructionOpcodeDescription	OperandsEquivalent Machine InstructionaddAdd immediate	r1 =imm,r3adds	r1 =imm14,r3addl	r1 =imm22,r3breakBreak	imm21break.b imm21	(B)
break.i imm21	(I)
break.m imm21	(M)
break.f imm21	(F)chk.sSpeculation check	r2,target25chk.s.i r2,target25(I)
chk.s.m  r2,target25(M)fabsFloating-point	f1 =f3
absolute valuefmerge.s  f1 =f0,f3fadd.pc
.Floating-point add	f1 =f3,f2fma.pc.sf f1 =f3,f1,f2sffcvt.xu fConvert integer to	f1 =f3
float unsignedfma.pc.sf f1 =f3,f1,f0


OpcodeInstruction Description
Operands
Equivalent Machine Instructionfmpy.pc
.Floating-point multiplyf1 =f3,f4fma.pc.sf f1 =f3,f4,f0sffnegFloating-point negatef1 =f3fmerge.ns f1 =f3,f3fnegabsFloating-point negate absolutef1 =f3fmerge.ns f1 =f0,f3valuefnorm.p c.sfFloating-point normalizef1 =f3fma.pc.sf f1 =f3,f1,f0fsub.pc
.Floating-point subtractf1 =f3,f2fms.pc.sf f1 =f3,f1,f2sfmovMove to application registerar3 =imm8mov.i	ar3 =imm8 (I)
mov.m	ar3 =imm8 (M)immediatemovMove to application registerar3=r2mov.i mov.mar3 ar3=r2
=r2(I)
(M)movMove floating-pointf1=f3fmerge.sf1=f3,f3registermovMove from application registerr1=ar3mov.i mov.mr1 r1=ar3 (I)
=ar3 (M)movMove immediater1=imm22addlr1=imm22,r0movMove general registerr1=r2addsr1=0,r2movMove to branch registerb1=r2movb1=r2nopNo operationimm21nop.b nop.i nop.m nop.fimm21 imm21 imm21 imm21(B)
(I)
(M)
(F)


Table B-1	Pseudo-ops Listed by Opcode (continued)
Instruction
Opcode	Description	Operands	Equivalent Machine Instruction

shl	Shift left	r1
=r2,count6
shr	Shift right signed	r1
=r3,count6

dep.z  r1
=r2,count6,64-count6
extr  r1
=r3,count6,64-count6

shr.u	Shift right unsigned
xma.lu Fixed-point multiply low unsigned

r1
=r3,count6
f1
=f2,f3,f4,

extr.u r1
=r3,count6,64-count6
xma.l	f1 =f2,f3,f4





Table B-2 lists pseudo-ops that omit one or more operands of the machine instruction. The assembler substitutes the missing operand with a predefined value. The missing operand(s) appear as bold text.
In addition to omitting many operands, many completers may also be omitted.

Table B-2Pseudo-ops with Missing OperandsSubstitutePseudo-opMissing Operand(s)Valueallocalloc r1=ar.pfs,i,l,o,rar.pfscmpcmp.crel.ctype p1,p2=imm8,r3p0cmpcmp.crel.ctype p1,p2=r2,r3p0cmp4cmp4.crel.ctype p1,p2=imm8,r3p0cmp4cmp4.crel.ctype p1,p2=r2,r3p0cmpxchgcmpxchgsz.sem.ldhint r1=[r3],r2,ar.ccvar.ccvfclassfclass.m.fctype p1,p2=f2,f3
fclass.nm.fctype p1,p2=f2,f3p0fcmpfcmp.fcrel.fctype.sf p1,p2=f2,f3p0movmov pr=r2,mask17all onestbittbit.trel.ctype p1,p2=r3,pos6p0

Pseudo-op	Missing Operand(s)

Substitute Value



tnat	tbit.trel.ctype p1,p2=r3	p0





Link-relocation Operators	 C 
Table C-1 lists and describes the link-relocation operators, and their usage.:

Table C-1	Link-relocation Operators
Operator	Generates a Relocation For:	Usage:

@gprel(expr)	The current instruction or data object
that calculates the gp-relative offset to the address given by expr.
@secrel(expr)	The current data object that calculates
the offset, relative to the beginning of the section, to the address given by expr.
@segrel(expr)	The current data object that calculates
the offset, relative to the beginning of the segment, to the address given by expr.
@imagerel(expr)	The current data object that calculates
the offset, relative to the beginning of the image, to the address given by expr.
@ltoff(expr)	The current instruction that instructs the
linker to create a linkage table entry for expr, and calculates the gp-relative offset to the new linkage table entry.

data8 statements and add long immediate instructions.
data4 and data8 statements, and the addl instruction.

data4 and data8 statements, in ELF format.

data4 statements, in
ELF format.


add long immediate instructions.













OperatorGenerates a Relocation For:Usage:@fptr(sym)The current instruction or data object that calculates the address of the officialdata4 and data8
statements, and moveplabel descriptor for the symbol sym, which must be a procedure labellong immediate
instructions. Requires(function descriptor) name.function symbol in COFF
format. It can be used inadd long immediateinstructions whencombined with the@ltoff operator in the@ltoff(@fptr(sym)
form.@pltoff(sym)The current instruction or data object that calculates the gp-relative offset to the procedure linkage table entry for the symbol sym, which must be a function
name.data8 statements and add long immediate instructions. The PLT entry referenced by this
operator should be usedonly for a direct procedurecall. It does not serve as afunction descriptor name@ltv(expr)The current data object that calculates the address of the relocatabledata4 statements in ELF
format.expression expr ,with one exception; while it is expected that the addressescreated will need further relocation atrun-time, the linker should not create acorresponding relocation in the outputexecutable or shared object file. Therunnn-time consumer of the informationprovided is expected to relocate thesevalues.@section(sec)The current data object that provides the section header number of section sec . Used for debug information.data2 statements in
COFF format.


List of IA-64 Assembly Language Directives

Table D-1 summarizes the IA-64 assembly language directives according to category.

Table D-1	IA-64 Assembly Language Directives

CategoryDirectivesAlias declaration directives.alias
.secaliasAssembler annotations.pred.rel
.pred.vector
.mem.offset
.entryAssembler modes.auto
.explicit
.defaultByte order specification directive.msb
.lsbCommon symbol declaration directives.common
.lcommCross-section data allocation statements.xdata1
.xdata2
.xdata4
.xdata8
.xstring
.xstringz






CategoryDirectivesData-allocation statementsdata1 data2 data4 data8 real4 real8 real10 real16 string stringzExplicit template selection directives.mii
.mfi
.bbb
.mlx
.mib
.mmb
.mmi
.mbb
.mfb
.mmfFile symbol declaration directive.fileIdent string directive.identInclude file directive.includeLanguage specific data directive (Windows NT* specific).handlerdataProcedure declaration directives.proc
.endpRadix indicator directive.radixRegister stack directive.regstkReserving uniniatialized space statements.skip
.orgRotating register directives.rotr
.rotp
.rotf


Table D-1	IA-64 Assembly Language Directives (continued)

CategoryDirectivesSection directives.section
.pushsection
.popsection
.previous
.text
.data
.sdata
.bss
.sbss
.rodata
.commentSection and data alignment directive.alignStack unwind information directivesSee Table 3-6 in Chapter 3Symbol scope declaration directives.global
.weak
.localSymbol type and size directives.type
.sizeSymbolic debug directive.lnSymbolic debug directive Windows NT specific.bf
.efVirtual register allocation directives.vreg.allocatable
.vreg.safe_across_calls
.vreg.family
.vreg.var
.vreg.undef



























Glossary

absolute address	A virtual (not physical) address within the
process' address space that is computed as an absolute number.
absolute expression	An expression that is not subject to link-time
relocation.
alias	Two identifiers referring to the same element.
assembler	A program that translates assembly language into machine language.
assembly language	A low level symbolic language closely
resembling machine-code language.
binding		The process of resolving a symbolic reference in one module by finding the definition of the symbol in another module, and substituting the address of the definition in place of the symbolic reference. The linker binds relocatable object modules together, and the DLL loader binds executable load modules.
When searching for a definition, the linker and DLL loader search each module in a certain order, so that a definition of a symbol in one module has precedence over a definition of the same symbol in a later module. This order is called the binding order.


bundle	128 bits that include three instructions and a template field.
COFF		Common Object File Format, an object-module format.
directive	An assembler instruction that does not produce executable code.
execution time	The time during which a program is actually
executing, not including the time during which the program and its DLLs are being loaded.
expression	A sequence of symbols that represents a value. function name	 A label that refers to a procedure entry point.
global symbol	Symbol visible outside the source file in which
it is defined.
IA-32	Intel Architecture-32: the name for Intel's current 32-bit Instruction Set Architecture (ISA).
identifier	Syntactic representation of symbol names using alphabetic or special characters, and digits.
instruction	An operation code that performs a specific machine operation.
instruction group	IA-64 architecture instructions are organized in
instruction groups. Each instruction group contains one or more statically contiguous instructions that execute in parallel. An instruction group must contain at least one instruction; there is no upper limit on the number of instructions in an instruction group. An instruction group is terminated statically by a stop, and dynamically by taken branches.











Instruction Set Architecture

Stops are represented by a double semi-colon (;;). You can explicitly define stops. Stops immediately follow an instruction, or appear on a separate line. They can be inserted between two instructions on the same line, as a
semi-colon (;) is used to separate two instructions.
The architecture that defines application level resources which include: user-level instructions, addressing modes, segmentation, and user visible register files.

instruction tag	 A label that refers to an instruction. ISA	See Instruction Set Architecture Itanium processor	Name of Intel's first IA-64 processor. label	A location in memory of code or data.
link time	The time when a program, dynamic-link library (DLL), or starred object is processed by the linker. Any activity taking place at link time is static.
linkage table	A table containing text, unwind information,
constants, literals, and pointers to imported data symbols and functions.
local symbol	Symbol visible only within the source file in which it is defined.
location counter	Keeps track of the current address when
assembling a program. It starts at zero at the beginning of each segment and increments appropriately as each instruction is assembled. To adjust the location counter of a section, use the .align directive, or the .org directive.


memory stack	A contiguous array of memory locations,
commonly referred to as "the stack", used in many processors to save the state of the calling procedure, pass parameters to the called procedure and store local variables for the currently executing procedure.
mnemonic	A predefined assembly-language name for machine instructions, pseudo-ops, directives, and data-allocation statements.
multiway branch bundle A bundle that contains more than one branch
instruction.
name space	A virtual (not physical) file. The assembler assigns names to a symbol, register, or mnemonic name space. Usually a name is defined only once in each separate name space. A name can be defined twice, in the symbol and register name space. In this case the register name takes precedence over the symbol name.
operator	The assembly-language operators indicate arithmetic or bitwise-logic calculations.
plabel	See procedure label.
predicate registers	64 1-bit predicate registers that control the
execution of instructions. The first register, p0, is always treated as 1.
predication	The conditional execution of an instruction used to remove branches from code.
procedure label	A reference or pointer to a procedure. A
procedure label (PLabel) is a special descriptor that uniquely identifies the procedure. The PLabel descriptor contains the address of the function's actual entry point, and the linkage table pointer.


pseudo-op	An instruction aliasing a machine instruction, provided for the convenience of the programmer.
qualifying predicate	The execution of most instructions is gated by a
qualifying predicate. If the predicate is true, the instruction executes normally; if the instruction is false the instruction does not modify architectural state or affect program behaviour.
register rotation	Software renaming of registers to provide every
loop iteration with its own set of registers.

register stack configuration

A 64-bit register used to control the register stack engine (RSE).

relocatable expression	An expression that is subject to link-time
relocation
rotating registers	Registers which are rotated by one register
position at each loop execution so that the content of register X is in register X+1 after one rotation. The predicate, floating-point, and general registers can be rotated. The registers are rotated in a wrap-around fashion.
section	Portions of an object file, such as code or data, bound to one unit.
software pipelining	Pipelining of a loop by way of allowing the
processor to execute, in any given time, several instructions in various instructions of the loop.
stacked registers	Stacked general registers, starting at r32, used
to pass parameters to the called procedure and store local variables for the currently executing procedure.


statement	An assembly-language program consists of a series of statements. The following are primary types of assembly-language statements:
• label statements
• instruction statements
• directive statements
• assignment statements
• equate statements
• data allocation statements
• cross-data allocation statements
stop	Indicates the boundary of an instruction group. It is placed in the code by the assembly writer or compiler.
symbol declaration	The symbol address is resolved, not necessarily
based on the current module. Declare symbols using a .global or .weak directive.
symbol definition	The symbol address is resolved based on the
current module. A symbol is defined by assigning it a type and value. You can define a symbol either in an assignment statement, by using it as a label, or with a .common directive.
temporary symbol	A symbol name that is not placed in the
object-file symbol table. To define a temporary symbol name, precede the name with a period (.).
weak symbol	Undefined symbol in object file, resolved during link time.












Index



Symbols

" double quotes, 2-14
"comdat", 3-2, 3-3
"nobits", 3-2
"note", 3-2
"progbits", 3-2
# line,C preprocessor support, 6-9
# number sign, 2-2
$ dollar sign, 2-3
() parentheses, 2-15
. period, 2-3, Glossary-6
.. two periods, 2-3
.auto directive, 3-13
.common directive, 6-7
.default directive, 3-13
.explicit directive, 3-13
.mem.offset annotation, 7-2
.ua completer, 5-3, 5-4
@ "at" sign, 2-4
@alt, 2-4
@brcst, 2-4
@filename, 6-9
@filepath, 6-9 @fptr, C-2 @function, 4-4

@gprel, C-1 @imagerel, C-1 @inf, 2-4
@line, 6-9 @ltoff, C-1 @mix, 2-4
@nat, 2-4
@neg, 2-4
@norm, 2-4
@notype, 4-4
@object, 4-4 @pltoff, C-2 @pos, 2-4
@qnan, 2-4
@rev, 2-4 @secrel, C-1 @segrel, C-1 @shuf, 2-4
@snan, 2-4
@unorm, 2-4
@zero, 2-4
\ backslash, 2-14
_ underscore, 2-13
{} braces, 3-10
' single quote, 2-13




A

absolute expressions, 2-14
absolute sections, 3-6
alias declaration, 4-8
.alias directive, 4-8
.align statement, 5-5
alignment, 5-4
alloc instruction, 6-1
annotations, 7-1
.entry, 7-3
.pred.rel, 7-1
   .pred.vector, 7-2 application registers, A-2 assembly modes, 3-13
assignment statements, 2-19
automatic mode, 3-13

B

.bbb directive, 3-11
.bf directive, 3-24
.body directive, 3-15
body regions, 3-15 branch registers, A-2
.bss directive, 3-7 bundles
implicit and explicit bundling, 3-10
template selection, 3-11
   with multiway branching, 3-9 byte order specification, 5-3, 6-7

C

C numeric constants, 2-10 character escapes, 2-13
clear form, 7-1
COMDAT section flags, 3-3

.comment directive, 3-7
.common directive, 4-6
common symbols, 4-6
completers, 2-8, 2-18, 5-3, 5-4 constants
C numeric constants, 2-10 MASM numeric constants, 2-11 numeric constants, 2-9
   string constants, 2-14 control registers, A-3
.copy_state directive, 3-17
cross-section data allocation statements, 2-23, 5-5
current location counter, 2-3 current sections, 3-1

D

data allocation statements, 2-22, 5-1
.align, 5-5
.org, 5-3
.skip, 5-3
list of, 5-2
specifying byte order, 5-3, 6-7
.data directive, 3-7 data object alignment, 5-4 debug information, 3-24
declarations, 4-1
dependency violations, 3-13
directive statements, 2-19 directives
.alias, 4-8
.bbb, 3-11
.body, 3-15
.bss, 3-7
.comment, 3-7
.common, 4-6, 6-7
.data, 3-7
.endp, 3-14, 3-15, 3-16
.fframe, 3-17







Index-2	IA-64 Assembly Language Reference Guide




.file, 4-6
.handlerdata, 3-15, 3-23
.ident, 6-7
.include, 3-8
.lcomm, 4-7
.ln, 3-24
.local, 4-2
.lsb, 5-3, 6-7
.mbb, 3-11
.mfb, 3-11
.mib, 3-11
.mlx, 3-11
.mmb, 3-11
.mmf, 3-11
.mmi, 3-11
.msb, 5-3, 6-7
.personality, 3-17
.popsection, 3-5
.previous, 3-6
.proc, 3-14, 3-15
.prologue, 3-15
.pushsection, 3-3, 3-5
.radix, 6-8
.regstk, 6-2
.restore, 3-17
.rodata, 3-7
.rotf, 6-4
.rotp, 6-4
.rotr, 6-4
.save, 3-17
.save.b, 3-21
.save.f, 3-21
.save.g, 3-21
.save.gf, 3-21
.savepsp, 3-17
.savesp, 3-17
.sbss, 3-7
.sdata, 3-7
.secalias, 4-8
.section, 3-3, 3-4, 5-5
.size, 4-5
.spill, 3-20
.text, 3-7
.type, 4-4

.unwabi, 3-20
.unwentry, 3-16
.vframe, 3-17
.vframepsp, 3-17
.vframesp, 3-17
copy_state, 3-17
label_state, 3-17
listed by category, D-1 thru D-3 Windows* NT* specific directives
.bf, 3-24
.ef, 3-24

E

.ef directive, 3-24
.endp directive, 3-14, 3-15, 3-16
.entry annotation, 7-3
equate statements, 2-21
explicit mode, 3-13
expressions, 2-14, Glossary-2
absolute expressions, 2-14
   relocatable expressions, 2-14, Glossary-5 external symbols, 4-8

F

.fframe directive, 3-17
.file directive, 4-6 file name, overriding, 4-6
floating-point registers, A-1 function descriptor, 3-14 function names, 2-5, Glossary-2

G

general registers, A-1
global symbols, 2-17, 4-2, Glossary-2



H

.handlerdata directive, 3-15, 3-23
headers, 3-15, 3-23

I

IA-32, Glossary-2
.ident directive, 6-7
ident strings, 6-7
identifiers, 2-1, Glossary-2
imply form, 7-1
.include directive, 3-8
include files, 3-8
indirect-register files, A-4 instruction bundles, 3-9
instruction completers, 2-8, 2-18 instruction group stops, 3-12 instruction groups, 3-12, Glossary-2 instruction statements, 2-17
instruction suffixes, 2-8 instruction tags, 2-5, Glossary-3 ISA, Glossary-3
Itanium(tm) processor, Glossary-3

L

label statements, 2-16
.label_state directive, 3-17
labels, 2-5, 2-16, Glossary-3
.lcomm directive, 4-7 link time, Glossary-3 linkage table, Glossary-3
link-relocation operators, 2-15 list of, C-1 thru C-2
.ln directive, 3-24
local common symbols, 4-7
.local directive, 4-2

local symbols, 4-2, Glossary-3 location counter, 2-3, 3-1, Glossary-3
.lsb directive, 5-3, 6-7

M

machine instructions, 2-8, 3-9, 3-12, Glossary-2
alloc instruction, 6-1
tags, 2-5
MASM numeric constants, 2-11 memory stack, Glossary-4
.mfb directive, 3-11
.mib directive, 3-11
.mlx directive, 3-11
.mmb directive, 3-11
.mmf directive, 3-11
.mbb directive, 3-11
.mmi directive, 3-11
mnemonics, 2-7, Glossary-4
cross-section data allocation mnemonics, 5-6 data allocation mnemonics, 2-9, 5-2
directive mnemonics, 2-9
machine instruction mnemonics, 2-8 pseudo-op mnemonics, 2-8
.msb directive, 5-3, 6-7
multiway branch bundles, 3-9, Glossary-4 mutex form, 7-1

N

name spaces, 2-2, 2-19, Glossary-4
nobits, 3-2, 3-7, 5-3
null terminated string, 6-7 numeric constants, 2-9, 6-8

O

opcodes, 2-18



operands, 2-19
operators, 2-15, Glossary-4
.org statement, 5-3

P

.personality directive, 3-17
PLabel, 3-14 plabel, Glossary-4
.popsection directive, 3-5
.pred.rel annotation, 7-1
.pred.vector annotation, 7-2
predefined section directives, 3-6, 3-7 predicate registers, A-2, Glossary-4 predication, Glossary-4
preprocessor built-in symbols, 6-9
.previous directive, 3-6
.proc directive, 3-14, 3-15 procedure label, Glossary-4 procedure label (PLabel), 3-14 procedures, 3-13
declaring, 3-14
prologues, 3-15
progbits, 3-2, 3-5
.prologue directive, 3-15
pseudo-ops, 2-8, Glossary-5 list of, B-1 thru B-3
.pushsection directive, 3-3, 3-5

Q

qualifying predicate, 2-17, Glossary-5

R

radix constants and indicators, 6-8
.radix directive, 6-8
region headers, 3-15, 3-23

register assignment statements, 2-20 register equate statements, 2-21 register rotation, Glossary-5
register stack, 6-1
registers, 2-6
application registers, A-2
assigning new register names, 2-6, 2-20,
2-21
branch registers, A-2 control registers, A-3
defining stacked registers, 6-3 floating-point registers, A-1 general registers, A-1
indirect-register files, A-4 predicate registers, A-2 register forms, 2-7
register renaming, 6-1
rotating registers, 6-3 stacked registers
defining, 6-3
.regstk directive, 6-2
relocatable expressions, 2-14, Glossary-5
.restore directive, 3-17
.rodata directive, 3-7 rotating registers, Glossary-5
rotating registers, defining, 6-3, 6-6
.rotf directive, 6-4
.rotp directive, 6-4
.rotr directive, 6-4

S

.save directive, 3-17
.save.b directive, 3-21
.save.f directive, 3-21
.save.g directive, 3-21
.save.gf directive, 3-21
.savepsp directive, 3-17
.savesp directive, 3-17
.sbss directive, 3-7



scope declarations, 4-1
declaring a global symbol, 4-2 declaring a local symbol, 4-2 declaring a weak symbol, 4-2
.sdata directive, 3-7
.secalias directive, 4-8
.section directive, 3-3, 3-4, 5-5 section flag characters, 3-2
section flags and types, 3-6 section names, 2-5
section return directive, 3-6 sections, 3-1, Glossary-5
defining, 3-4
defining a section stack, 3-5 predefined, 3-6
returning to, 3-6
section types, 3-2
specifying section flags and types, 3-2
.size directive, 4-5
.skip statement, 5-3
software pipelining, 6-4, Glossary-5
.spill directive, 3-20 stack unwind directives, 3-15
list of, 3-16
using, 3-22
stack unwind information, 3-13 stacked registers, 6-1, Glossary-5
defining, 6-3
statements, 2-16, Glossary-6
assignment statements, 2-19 defining register names, 2-20 defining symbol names, 2-20
cross-section data allocation statements, 2-23, 5-5
data allocation, 5-1
data allocation statements, 2-22, 5-2
directive statements, 2-19
equate statements, 2-21
defining register names, 2-21 defining symbol names, 2-21
instruction statements, 2-17
   
label statements, 2-16 stop, Glossary-6
in bundles, 3-9
in explicit bundles, 3-10 in instruction groups, 3-12
stop bit, 3-9
string constants, 2-14
symbol assignment statements, 2-20 symbol definition, 2-6, Glossary-6 symbol equate statements, 2-21 symbolic constants, 2-5
symbolic debug information Windows* NT* specific, 3-24
symbols, 2-2
assigning a value, 2-6 declaring, Glossary-6
declaring common symbols, 4-6 declaring local common symbols, 4-7 declaring symbol scopes, 4-1 defining, 2-6, Glossary-6
predefined symbol names, 2-4 referencing external symbols, 4-8 specifying symbol size, 4-5 specifying symbol types, 4-4 symbol names, 2-3
symbol types, 2-5

T

tag operand, 2-5, 3-16
temporary symbols, 2-3, Glossary-6
.text directive, 3-7 thread local storage, 3-3
.type directive, 4-4

U

unaligned data objects, 5-3, 5-4 undefined symbols, Glossary-6 uninitialized data allocation, 5-3


.unwabi directive, 3-20
.unwentry directive, 3-16

V

.vframe directive, 3-17
.vframepsp directive, 3-17
.vframesp directive, 3-17

W

weak symbols, 4-2, Glossary-6
















































































































































































































